tthew Chapter 1

The genealogy of Christ: he is conceived and born of a virgin.

1:1. The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the
son of Abraham:

1:2. Abraham begot Isaac. And Isaac begot Jacob. And Jacob begot Judas
and his brethren.

1:3. And Judas begot Phares and Zara of Thamar. And Phares begot Esron.
And Esron begot Aram.

1:4. And Aram begot Aminadab. And Aminadab begot Naasson. And Naasson
begot Salmon.

1:5. And Salmon begot Booz of Rahab. And Booz begot Obed of Ruth.  And
Obed begot Jesse.

1:6. And Jesse begot David the king. And David the king begot Solomon,
of her that had been the wife of Urias.

1:7. And Solomon begot Roboam. And Roboam begot Abia. And Abia begot
Asa.

1:8. And Asa begot Josaphat. And Josaphat begot Joram. And Joram begot
Ozias.

1:9. And Ozias begot Joatham. And Joatham begot Achaz. And Achaz begot
Ezechias.

1:10. And Ezechias begot Manasses. And Manasses begot Amon. And Amon
begot Josias.

1:11. And Josias begot Jechonias and his brethren in the transmigration
of Babylon.

1:12. And after the transmigration of Babylon, Jechonias begot
Salathiel. And Salathiel begot Zorobabel.

1:13. And Zorobabel begot Abiud. And Abiud begot Eliacim. And Eliacim
begot Azor.

1:14. And Azor begot Sadoc. And Sadoc begot Achim. And Achim begot
Eliud.

1:15. And Eliud begot Eleazar. And Eleazar begot Mathan. And Mathan
begot Jacob.

1:16. And Jacob begot Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born
Jesus, who is called Christ.

The husband of Mary... The Evangelist gives us rather the pedigree of
St. Joseph, than that of the blessed Virgin, to conform to the custom of
the Hebrews, who in their genealogies took no notice of women; but as
they were near akin, the pedigree of the one sheweth that of the other.

1:17. So all the generations from Abraham to David, are fourteen
generations. And from David to the transmigration of Babylon, are
fourteen generations: and from the transmigration of Babylon to Christ
are fourteen generations.

1:18. Now the generation of Christ was in this wise. When as his mother
Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found
with child, of the Holy Ghost.

1:19. Whereupon Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing
publicly to expose her, was minded to put her away privately.

1:20. But while he thought on these things, behold the Angel of the Lord
appeared to him in his sleep, saying: Joseph, son of David, fear not to
take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in her, is of
the Holy Ghost.

1:21. And she shall bring forth a son: and thou shalt call his name
Jesus. For he shall save his people from their sins.

1:22. Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which the Lord
spoke by the prophet, saying:

1:23. Behold a virgin shall be with child, and bring forth a son, and
they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with
us.

1:24. And Joseph rising up from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord had
commanded him, and took unto him his wife.

1:25. And he knew her not till she brought forth her first born son: and
he called his name Jesus.

Till she brought forth her firstborn son... From these words Helvidius
and other heretics most impiously inferred that the blessed Virgin Mary
had other children besides Christ; but St.  Jerome shews, by divers
examples, that this expression of the Evangelist was a manner of
speaking usual among the Hebrews, to denote by the word until, only what
is done, without any regard to the future. Thus it is said, Genesis 8. 6
and 7, that Noe sent forth a raven, which went forth, and did not return
till the waters were dried up on the earth. That is, did not return any
more. Also Isaias 46. 4, God says: I am till you grow old. Who dare
infer that God should then cease to be: Also in the first book of
Machabees 5. 54, And they went up to mount Sion with joy and gladness,
and offered holocausts, because not one of them was slain till they had
returned in peace. That is, not one was slain before or after they had
returned. God saith to his divine Son: Sit on my right hand till I make
thy enemies thy footstool. Shall he sit no longer after his enemies are
subdued? Yea and for all eternity. St. Jerome also proves by Scripture
examples, that an only begotten son, was also called firstborn, or first
begotten: because according to the law, the firstborn males were to be
consecrated to God; Sanctify unto me, saith the Lord, every firstborn
that openeth the womb among the children of Israel, etc. Ex. 13. 2.

Matthew Chapter 2

The offerings of the wise men: the flight into Egypt: the massacre of
the Innocents.

2:1. When Jesus therefore was born in Bethlehem of Juda, in the days of
king Herod, behold, there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem,

2:2. Saying: Where is he that is born king of the Jews? For we have seen
his star in the East, and are come to adore him.

2:3. And king Herod hearing this, was troubled, and all Jerusalem with
him.

2:4. And assembling together all the chief priests and the scribes of
the people, he inquired of them where Christ should be born.

2:5. But they said to him: In Bethlehem of Juda. For so it is written by
the prophet:

2:6. And thou Bethlehem the land of Juda art not the least among the
princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come forth the captain that shall
rule my people Israel.

2:7. Then Herod, privately calling the wise men learned diligently of
them the time of the star which appeared to them;

2:8. And sending them into Bethlehem, said: Go and diligently inquire
after the child, and when you have found him, bring me word again, that
I also may come and adore him.

2:9. Who having heard the king, went their way; and behold the star
which they had seen in the East, went before them, until it came and
stood over where the child was.

2:10. And seeing the star they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.

2:11. And entering into the house, they found the child with Mary his
mother, and falling down they adored him: and opening their treasures,
they offered him gifts; gold, frankincense, and myrrh.

2:12. And having received an answer in sleep that they should not return
to Herod, they went back another way into their country.

2:13. And after they were departed, behold an angel of the Lord appeared
in sleep to Joseph, saying: Arise, and take the child and his mother,
and fly into Egypt: and be there until I shall tell thee. For it will
come to pass that Herod will seek the child to destroy him.

2:14. Who arose, and took the child and his mother by night, and retired
into Egypt: and he was there until the death of Herod:

2:15. That it might be fulfilled which the Lord spoke by the prophet,
saying: Out of Egypt have I called my son.

2:16. Then Herod perceiving that he was deluded by the wise men, was
exceeding angry: and sending killed all the menchildren that were in
Bethlehem, and in all the borders thereof, from two years old and under,
according to the time which he had diligently inquired of the wise men.

2:17. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremias the prophet,
saying:

2:18. A voice in Rama was heard, lamentation and great mourning; Rachel
bewailing her children, and would not be comforted, because they are
not.

2:19. But when Herod was dead, behold an angel of the Lord appeared in
sleep to Joseph in Egypt,

2:20. Saying: Arise, and take the child and his mother, and go into the
land of Israel. For they are dead that sought the life of the child.

2:21. Who arose, and took the child and his mother, and came into the
land of Israel.

2:22. But hearing that Archclaus reigned in Judea in the room of Herod
his father, he was afraid to go thither: and being warned in sleep
retired into the quarters of Galilee.

2:23. And coming he dwelt in a city called Nazareth: that it might be
fulfilled which was said by the prophets: That he shall be called a
Nazarene.

Matthew Chapter 3

The preaching of John: Christ is baptized.

3:1. And in those days cometh John the Baptist preaching in the desert
of Judea.

3:2. And saying: Do penance: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Do penance... Paenitentiam agite. Which word, according to the use of
the scriptures and the holy fathers, does not only signify repentance
and amendment of life, but also punishing past sins by fasting, and such
like penitential exercises.

3:3. For this is he that was spoken of by Isaias the prophet, saying: A
voice of one crying in the desert, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make
straight his paths.

3:4. And the same John had his garment of camel's hair, and a leathern
girdle about his loins: and his meat was locusts and wild honey.

3:5. Then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the country
about Jordan:

3:6. And were baptized by him in the Jordan, confessing their sins.

3:7. And seeing many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his
baptism, he said to them: Ye brood of vipers, who hath shewed you to
flee from the wrath to come?

Pharisees and Sadducees... These were two sects among the Jews: of which
the former were for the most part notorious hypocrites; the latter, a
kind of freethinkers in matters of religion.

3:8. Bring forth therefore fruit worthy of penance.

3:9. And think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham for our
father. For I tell you that God is able of these stones to raise up
children to Abraham.

3:10. For now the axe is laid to the root of the trees. Every tree
therefore that doth not yield good fruit, shall be cut down, and cast
into the fire.

3:11. I indeed baptize you in water unto penance, but he that shall come
after me, is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he
shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost and fire.

3:12. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his floor
and gather his wheat into the barn; but the chaff he will burn with
unquenchable fire.

3:13. Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan, unto John, to be
baptized by him.

3:14. But John stayed him, saying: I ought to be baptized by thee, and
comest thou to me?

3:15. And Jesus answering, said to him: Suffer it to be so now.  For so
it becometh us to fulfil all justice. Then he suffered him.

3:16. And Jesus being baptized, forthwith came out of the water: and lo,
the heavens were opened to him: and he saw the Spirit of God descending
as a dove, and coming upon him.

3:17. And behold a voice from heaven saying: This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased.

Matthew Chapter 4

Christ's fast of forty days: He is tempted. He begins to preach, to call
disciples to him, and to work miracles.

4:1. Then Jesus was led by the spirit into the desert, to be tempted by
the devil.

4:2. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, afterwards he
was hungry.

4:3. And the tempter coming said to him: If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.

4:4. Who answered and said: It is written, Not in bread alone doth man
live, but in every word that proceedeth from the mouth of God.

4:5. Then the devil took him up into the holy city, and set him upon the
pinnacle of the temple,

4:6. And said to him: If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down, for
it is written: That he hath given his angels charge over thee, and in
their hands shall they bear thee up, lest perhaps thou dash thy foot
against a stone.

4:7. Jesus said to him: It is written again: Thou shalt not tempt the
Lord thy God.

4:8. Again the devil took him up into a very high mountain, and shewed
him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them,

Shewed him, etc... That is, pointed out to him where each kingdom lay;
and set forth in words what was most glorious and admirable in each of
them. Or also set before his eyes, as it were in a large map, a lively
representation of all those kingdoms.

4:9. And said to him: All these will I give thee, if falling down thou
wilt adore me.

4:10. Then Jesus saith to him: Begone, Satan: for it is written: The
Lord thy God shalt thou adore, and him only shalt thou serve.

4:11. Then the devil left him; and behold angels came and ministered to
him.

4:12. And when Jesus had heard that John was delivered up, he retired
into Galilee:

4:13. And leaving the city Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capharnaum on
the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and of Nephthalim;

4:14. That it might be fulfilled which was said by Isaias the prophet:

4:15. Land of Zabulon and land of Nephthalim, the way of the sea beyond
the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles:

4:16. The people that sat in darkness, hath seen great light: and to
them that sat in the region of the shadow of death, light is sprung up.

4:17. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say: Do penance, for
the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

4:18. And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon
who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea
(for they were fishers).

4:19. And he saith to them: Come ye after me, and I will make you to be
fishers of men.

4:20. And they immediately leaving their nets, followed him.

4:21. And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son
of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father,
mending their nets: and he called them.

4:22. And they forthwith left their nets and father, and followed him.

4:23. And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues,
and preaching the gospel of the kingdom: and healing all manner of
sickness and every infirmity, among the people.

4:24. And his fame went throughout all Syria, and they presented to him
all sick people that were taken with divers diseases and torments, and
such as were possessed by devils, and lunatics, and those that had the
palsy, and he cured them:

4:25. And much people followed him from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and
from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond the Jordan.

Matthew Chapter 5

Christ's sermon upon the mount. The eight beatitudes.

5:1. And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain, and when he
was set down, his disciples came unto him.

5:2. And opening his mouth he taught them, saying:

5:3. Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven.

The poor in spirit... That is, the humble; and they whose spirit is not
set upon riches.

5:4. Blessed are the meek: for they shall possess the land.

5:5. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.

5:6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after justice: for they
shall have their fill.

5:7. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.

5:8. Blessed are the clean of heart: they shall see God.

5:9. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children
of God.

5:10. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice' sake: for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

5:11. Blessed are ye when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and
speak all that is evil against you, untruly, for my sake:

5:12. Be glad and rejoice for your reward is very great in heaven. For
so they persecuted the prophets that were before you.

5:13. You are the salt of the earth. But if the salt lose its savour,
wherewith shall it be salted? It is good for nothing anymore but to be
cast out, and to be trodden on by men.

5:14. You are the light of the world. A city seated on a mountain cannot
be hid.

5:15. Neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel, but upon
a candlestick, that it may shine to all that are in the house.

5:16. So let your light shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.

5:17. Do not think that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets. I
am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.

To fulfil... By accomplishing all the figures and prophecies; and
perfecting all that was imperfect.

5:18. For amen I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or
one tittle shall not pass of the law, till all be fulfilled.

Amen... That is, assuredly of a truth... This Hebrew word, amen, is here
retained by the example and authority of all the four Evangelists. It is
used by our Lord as a strong asseveration, and affirmation of the truth.

5:19. He therefore that shall break one of these least commandments, and
shall so teach men shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven.
But he that shall do and teach, he shall be called great in the kingdom
of heaven.

5:20. For I tell you, that unless your justice abound more than that of
the scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

The scribes and Pharisees... The scribes were the doctors of the law of
Moses: the Pharisees were a precise set of men, making profession of a
more exact observance of the law: and upon that account greatly esteemed
among the people.

5:21. You have heard that it was said to them of old: Thou shalt not
kill. And whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment.

Shall be in danger of the judgment... That is, shall deserve to be
punished by that lesser tribunal among the Jews, called the Judgment,
which took cognizance of such crimes.

5:22. But I say to you, that whosoever is angry with his brother, shall
be in danger of the judgment. And whosoever shall say to his brother,
Raca, shall be in danger of the council. And whosoever shall say, Thou
fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

Raca... A word expressing great indignation or contempt. Shall be in
danger of the council... That is, shall deserve to be punished by the
highest court of judicature, called the Council, or Sanhedrim,
consisting of seventy-two persons, where the highest causes were tried
and judged, which was at Jerusalem.  Thou fool... This was then looked
upon as a heinous injury, when uttered with contempt, spite, or malice:
and therefore is here so severely condemned. Shall be in danger of hell
fire...  literally, according to the Greek, shall deserve to be cast
into the Gehenna of fire. Which words our Saviour made use of to express
the fire and punishments of hell.

5:23. If therefore thou offer thy gift at the altar, and there thou
remember that thy brother hath anything against thee;

5:24. Leave there thy offering before the altar, and go first to be
reconciled to thy brother, and then coming thou shalt offer thy gift.

5:25. Be at agreement with thy adversary betimes, whilst thou art in the
way with him: lest perhaps the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and
the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.

5:26. Amen I say to thee, thou shalt not go out from thence till thou
repay the last farthing.

5:27. You have heard that it was said to them of old: Thou shalt not
commit adultery.

5:28. But I say to you, that whosoever shall look on a woman to lust
after her, hath already committed adultery with her in his heart.

5:29. And if thy right eye scandalize thee, pluck it out and cast it
from thee. For it is expedient for thee that one of thy members should
perish, rather than thy whole body be cast into hell.

Scandalize thee... That is, if it be a stumblingblock, or occasion of
sin to thee. By which we are taught to fly the immediate occasions of
sin, though they be as dear to us, or as necessary as a hand or an eye.

5:30. And if thy right hand scandalize thee, cut it off, and cast it
from thee: for it is expedient for thee that one of thy members should
perish, rather than that thy whole body go into hell.

5:31. And it hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him
give her a bill of divorce.

5:32. But I say to you, that whosoever shall put away his wife,
excepting the cause of fornication, maketh her to commit adultery: and
he that shall marry her that is put away, committeth adultery.

5:33. Again you have heard that it was said to them of old, thou shalt
not forswear thyself: but thou shalt perform thy oaths to the Lord.

5:34. But I say to you not to swear at all, neither by heaven for it is
the throne of God:

Not to swear at all... It is not forbid to swear in truth, justice and
judgment; to the honour of God, or our own or neighbour's just defence:
but only to swear rashly, or profanely, in common discourse, and without
necessity.

5:35. Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool: nor by Jerusalem, for
it is the city of the great king:

5:36. Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make
one hair white or black.

5:37. But let your speech be yea, yea: no, no: and that which is over
and above these, is of evil.

5:38. You have heard that it hath been said: An eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth.

5:39. But I say to you not to resist evil: but if one strike thee on thy
right cheek, turn to him also the other:

Not to resist evil, etc... What is here commanded, is a Christian
patience under injuries and affronts, and to be willing even to suffer
still more, rather than to indulge the desire of revenge: but what is
further added does not strictly oblige according to the letter, for
neither did Christ nor St.  Paul turn the other cheek. St. John 18., and
Acts 23.

5:40. And if a man will contend with thee in judgment, and take away thy
coat, let go thy cloak also unto him.

5:41. And whosoever will force thee one mile, go with him other two.

5:42. Give to him that asketh of thee, and from him that would borrow of
thee turn not away.

5:43. You have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy
neighbour, and hate thy enemy.

5:44. But I say to you, Love your enemies: do good to them that hate
you: and pray for them that persecute and calumniate you:

5:45. That you may be the children of your Father who is in heaven, who
maketh his sun to rise upon the good, and bad, and raineth upon the just
and the unjust.

5:46. For if you love them that love you, what reward shall you have? do
not even the publicans this?

The publicans... These were the gatherers of the public taxes: a set of
men, odious and infamous among the Jews, for their extortions and
injustice.

5:47. And if you salute your brethren only, what do you more? do not
also the heathens this?

5:48. Be you therefore perfect, as also your heavenly Father is perfect.

Matthew Chapter 6

A continuation of the sermon on the mount.

6:1. Take heed that you do not your justice before men, to be seen by
them: otherwise you shall not have a reward of your Father who is in
heaven.

Your justice... that is, works of justice; viz., fasting, prayer, and
almsdeeds; which ought to be performed not out of ostentation, or a view
to please men, but solely to please God.

6:2. Therefore when thou dost an alms-deed, sound not a trumpet before
thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that
they may be honoured by men. Amen I say to you, they have received their
reward.

6:3. But when thou dost alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right
hand doth.

6:4. That thy alms may be in secret, and thy Father who seeth in secret
will repay thee.

6:5. And when ye pray, you shall not be as the hypocrites, that love to
stand and pray in the synagogues and corners of the streets, that they
may be seen by men: Amen I say to you, they have received their reward.

6:6. But thou when thou shalt pray, enter into thy chamber, and having
shut the door, pray to thy Father in secret, and thy father who seeth in
secret will repay thee.

6:7. And when you are praying, speak not much, as the heathens.  For
they think that in their much speaking they may be heard.

6:8. Be not you therefore like to them for your Father knoweth what is
needful for you, before you ask him.

6:9. Thus therefore shall you pray: Our Father who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name.

6:10. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.

6:11. Give us this day our supersubstantial bread.

Supersubstantial bread... In St. Luke the same word is rendered daily
bread. It is understood of the bread of life, which we receive in the
Blessed Sacrament.

6:12. And forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors.

6:13. And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil.  Amen.

Lead us not into temptation... That is, suffer us not to be overcome by
temptation.

6:14. For if you will forgive men their offences, your heavenly Father
will forgive you also your offences.

6:15. But if you will not forgive men, neither will your Father forgive
you your offences.

6:16. And when you fast, be not as the hypocrites, sad. For they
disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast.  Amen I
say to you, they have received their reward.

6:17. But thou, when thou fastest anoint thy head, and wash thy face;

6:18. That thou appear not to men to fast, but to thy Father who is in
secret: and thy Father who seeth in secret, will repay thee.

6:19. Lay not up to yourselves treasures on earth: where the rust, and
moth consume, and where thieves break through, and steal.

6:20. But lay up to yourselves treasures in heaven: where neither the
rust nor moth doth consume, and where thieves do not break through, nor
steal.

6:21. For where thy treasure is, there is thy heart also.

6:22. The light of thy body is thy eye. If thy eye be single, thy whole
body shall be lightsome.

6:23. But if thy eye be evil thy whole body shall be darksome. If then
the light that is in thee, be darkness: the darkness itself how great
shall it be!

6:24. No man can serve two masters. For either he will hate the one, and
love the other: or he will sustain the one, and despise the other. You
cannot serve God and mammon.

Mammon... That is, riches, worldly interest.

6:25. Therefore I say to you, be not solicitous for your life, what you
shall eat, nor for your body, what you shall put on.  Is not the life
more than the meat: and the body more than the raiment?

6:26. Behold the birds of the air, for they neither sow, nor do they
reap, nor gather into barns: and your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are
not you of much more value than they?

6:27. And which of you by taking thought, can add to his stature one
cubit?

6:28. And for raiment why are you solicitous? Consider the lilies of the
field, how they grow: they labour not, neither do they spin.

6:29. But I say to you, that not even Solomon in all his glory was
arrayed as one of these.

6:30. And if the grass of the field, which is to day, and to morrow is
cast into the oven, God doth so clothe: how much more you, O ye of
little faith?

6:31. Be not solicitous therefore, saying: What shall we eat: or what
shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed?

6:32. For after all these things do the heathens seek. For your Father
knoweth that you have need of all these things.

6:33. Seek ye therefore first the kingdom of God, and his justice, and
all these things shall be added unto you.

6:34. Be not therefore solicitous for to morrow; for the morrow will be
solicitous for itself. Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.

Matthew Chapter 7

The third part of the sermon on the mount.

7:1. Judge not, that you may not be judged.

7:2. For with what judgment you judge, you shall be judged: and with
what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again.

7:3. And why seest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye; and seest
not the beam that is in thy own eye?

7:4. Or how sayest thou to thy brother: Let me cast the mote out of thy
eye; and behold a beam is in thy own eye?

7:5. Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thy own eye, and
then shalt thou see to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye.

7:6. Give not that which is holy to dogs; neither cast ye your pearls
before swine, lest perhaps they trample them under their feet, and
turning upon you, they tear you.

7:7. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and you shall find: knock,
and it shall be opened to you.

7:8. For every one that asketh, receiveth: and he that seeketh, findeth:
and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened.

7:9. Or what man is there among you, of whom if his son shall ask bread,
will he reach him a stone?

7:10. Or if he shall ask him a fish, will he reach him a serpent?

7:11. If you then being evil, know how to give good gifts to your
children: how much more will your Father who is in heaven, give good
things to them that ask him?

7:12. All things therefore whatsoever you would that men should do to
you, do you also to them. For this is the law and the prophets.

7:13. Enter ye in at the narrow gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is
the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there are who go in
thereat.

7:14. How narrow is the gate, and strait is the way that leadeth to
life: and few there are that find it!

7:15. Beware of false prophets, who come to you in the clothing of
sheep, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.

7:16. By their fruits you shall know them. Do men gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles?

7:17. Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit, and the evil
tree bringeth forth evil fruit.

7:18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can an evil
tree bring forth good fruit.

7:19. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, shall be cut down,
and shall be cast into the fire.

7:20. Wherefore by their fruits you shall know them.

7:21. Not every one that saith to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven: but he that doth the will of my Father who is in
heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.

7:22. Many will say to me in that day: Lord, Lord, have not we
prophesied in thy name, and cast out devils in thy name, and done many
miracles in thy name?

7:23. And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from
me, you that work iniquity.

7:24. Every one therefore that heareth these my words, and doth them,
shall be likened to a wise man that built his house upon a rock,

7:25. And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
they beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded on a
rock.

7:26. And every one that heareth these my words and doth them not, shall
be like a foolish man that built his house upon the sand,

7:27. And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
they beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall thereof.

7:28. And it came to pass when Jesus had fully ended these words, the
people were in admiration at his doctrine.

7:29. For he was teaching them as one having power, and not as the
scribes and Pharisees.

Matthew Chapter 8

Christ cleanses the leper, heals the centurion's servant, Peter's
mother-in-law, and many others: he stills the storm at sea, drives the
devils out of two men possessed, and suffers them to go into the swine.

8:1. And when he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes
followed him:

8:2. And behold a leper came and adored him, saying: Lord, if thou wilt,
thou canst make me clean.

8:3. And Jesus stretching forth his hand, touched him, saying: I will,
be thou made clean. And forthwith his leprosy was cleansed.

8:4. And Jesus saith to him: See thou tell no man: but go, shew thyself
to the priest, and offer the gift which Moses commanded, for a testimony
unto them.

8:5. And when he had entered into Capharnaum, there came to him a
centurion, beseeching him,

8:6. And saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, and
is grievously tormented.

8:7. And Jesus saith to him: I will come and heal him.

8:8. And the centurion, making answer, said: Lord, I am not worthy that
thou shouldst enter under my roof; but only say the word, and my servant
shall be healed.

8:9. For I also am a man subject to authority, having under me soldiers;
and I say to this, Go, and he goeth, and to another Come, and he cometh,
and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.

8:10. And Jesus hearing this, marvelled; and said to them that followed
him. Amen I say to you, I have not found so great faith in Israel.

8:11. And I say to you that many shall come from the east and the west,
and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of
heaven:

8:12. But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into the
exterior darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

8:13. And Jesus said to the centurion: Go, and as thou hast believed, so
be it done to thee. And the servant was healed at the same hour.

8:14. And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wife's
mother lying, and sick of a fever;

8:15. And he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she arose and
ministered to them.

8:16. And when evening was come, they brought to him many that were
possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with his word: and
all that were sick he healed:

8:17. That it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the prophet
Isaias, saying: He took our infirmities, and bore our diseases.

8:18. And Jesus seeing great multitudes about him, gave orders to pass
over the water.

8:19. And a certain scribe came and said to him: Master, I will follow
thee whithersoever thou shalt go.

8:20. And Jesus saith to him: The foxes have holes, and the birds of the
air nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.

8:21. And another of his disciples said to him: Lord, suffer me first to
go and bury my father.

8:22. But Jesus said to him: Follow me, and let the dead bury their
dead.

8:23. And when he entered into the boat, his disciples followed him:

8:24. And behold a great tempest arose in the sea, so that the boat was
covered with waves, but he was asleep.

8:25. And they came to him, and awaked him, saying: Lord, save us, we
perish.

8:26. And Jesus saith to them: Why are you fearful, O ye of little
faith? Then rising up, he commanded the winds, and the sea, and there
came a great calm.

8:27. But the men wondered, saying: What manner of man is this, for the
winds and the sea obey him?

8:28. And when he was come on the other side of the water, into the
country of the Gerasens, there met him two that were possessed with
devils, coming out of the sepulchres, exceeding fierce, so that none
could pass by that way.

8:29. And behold they cried out, saying: What have we to do with thee,
Jesus Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time?

8:30. And there was, not far from them, a herd of many swine feeding.

8:31. And the devils besought him, saying: If thou cast us out hence,
send us into the herd of swine.

8:32. And he said to them: Go. But they going out went into the swine,
and behold the whole herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea:
and they perished in the waters.

8:33. And they that kept them fled: and coming into the city, told every
thing, and concerning them that had been possessed by the devils.

8:34. And behold the whole city went out to meet Jesus, and when they
saw him, they besought him that he would depart from their coast.

Matthew Chapter 9

Christ heals one sick of palsy: calls Matthew: cures the issue of blood:
raises to life the daughter of Jairus: gives sight to two blind men: and
heals a dumb man possessed by the devil.

9:1. And entering into a boat, he passed over the water and came into
his own city.

9:2. And behold they brought to him one sick of the palsy lying in a
bed. And Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the man sick of the palsy:
Be of good heart, son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

9:3. And behold some of the scribes said within themselves: He
blasphemeth.

9:4. And Jesus seeing their thoughts, said: Why do you think evil in
your hearts?

9:5. Whether is easier, to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee: or to say,
Arise, and walk?

9:6. But that you may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to
forgive sins, (then said he to the man sick of the palsy,) Arise, take
up thy bed, and go into thy house.

9:7. And he arose, and went into his house.

9:8. And the multitude seeing it, feared, and glorified God that gave
such power to men.

9:9. And when Jesus passed on from thence, he saw a man sitting in the
custom house, named Matthew; and he saith to him: Follow me. And he
arose up and followed him.

9:10. And it came to pass as he was sitting at meat in the house, behold
many publicans and sinners came, and sat down with Jesus and his
disciples.

9:11. And the Pharisees seeing it, said to his disciples: Why doth your
master eat with publicans and sinners?

9:12. But Jesus hearing it, said: They that are in health need not a
physician, but they that are ill.

9:13. Go then and learn what this meaneth, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice. For I am not come to call the just, but sinners.

9:14. Then came to him the disciples of John, saying: Why do we and the
Pharisees, fast often, but thy disciples do not fast?

9:15. And Jesus said to them: Can the children of the bridegroom mourn,
as long as the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come, when the
bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then they shall fast.

Can the children of the bridegroom... This, by a Hebraism, signifies the
friends or companions of the bridegroom.

9:16. And nobody putteth a piece of raw cloth unto an old garment. For
it taketh away the fulness thereof from the garment, and there is made a
greater rent.

9:17. Neither do they put new wine into old bottles. Otherwise the
bottles break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish. But new
wine they put into new bottles: and both are preserved.

9:18. As he was speaking these things unto them, behold a certain ruler
came up, and adored him, saying: Lord, my daughter is even now dead; but
come, lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.

9:19. And Jesus rising up followed him, with his disciples.

9:20. And behold a woman who was troubled with an issue of blood twelve
years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his garment.

9:21. For she said within herself: If I shall touch only his garment, I
shall be healed.

9:22. But Jesus turning and seeing her, said: Be of good heart,
daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole. And the woman was made whole
from that hour.

9:23. And when Jesus was come into the house of the ruler, and saw the
minstrels and the multitude making a rout,

9:24. He said: Give place, for the girl is not dead, but sleepeth. And
they laughed him to scorn.

9:25. And when the multitude was put forth, he went in, and took her by
the hand. And the maid arose.

9:26. And the fame hereof went abroad into all that country.

9:27. And as Jesus passed from thence, there followed him two blind men
crying out and saying, Have mercy on us, O Son of David.

9:28. And when he was come to the house, the blind men came to him. And
Jesus saith to them, Do you believe, that I can do this unto you? They
say to him, Yea, Lord.

9:29. Then he touched their eyes, saying, According to your faith, be it
done unto you.

9:30. And their eyes were opened, and Jesus strictly charged them,
saying, See that no man know this.

9:31. But they going out, spread his fame abroad in all that country.

9:32. And when they were gone out, behold they brought him a dumb man,
possessed with a devil.

9:33. And after the devil was cast out, the dumb man spoke, and the
multitudes wondered, saying, Never was the like seen in Israel.

9:34. But the Pharisees said, By the prince of devils he casteth out
devils.

9:35. And Jesus went about all the cities and towns, teaching in their
synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every
disease, and every infirmity.

9:36. And seeing the multitudes, he had compassion on them: because they
were distressed, and lying like sheep that have no shepherd.

9:37. Then he saith to his disciples, The harvest indeed is great, but
the labourers are few.

9:38. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he send forth
labourers into his harvest.

Matthew Chapter 10

Christ sends out his twelve apostles, with the power of miracles. The
lessons he gives them.

10:1. And having called his twelve disciples together, he gave them
power over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of
diseases, and all manner of infirmities.

10:2. And the names of the twelve Apostles are these: The first, Simon
who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother,

10:3. James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, Philip and
Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the publican, and James the son of
Alpheus, and Thaddeus,

10:4. Simon the Cananean, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.

10:5. These twelve Jesus sent: commanding them, saying: Go ye not into
the way of the Gentiles, and into the city of the Samaritans enter ye
not.

10:6. But go ye rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

10:7. And going, preach, saying: The kingdom of heaven is at hand.

10:8. Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out
devils: freely have you received, freely give.

10:9. Do not possess gold, nor silver, nor money in your purses:

10:10. Nor scrip for your journey, nor two coats, nor shoes, nor a
staff; for the workman is worthy of his meat.

10:11. And into whatsoever city or town you shall enter, inquire who in
it is worthy, and there abide till you go thence.

10:12. And when you come into the house, salute it, saying: Peace be to
this house.

10:13. And if that house be worthy, your peace shall come upon it; but
if it be not worthy, your peace shall return to you.

10:14. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words: going
forth out of that house or city shake off the dust from your feet.

10:15. Amen I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.

10:16. Behold I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves. Be ye
therefore wise as serpents and simple as doves.

Simple... That is, harmless, plain, sincere, and without guile.

10:17. But beware of men. For they will deliver you up in councils, and
they will scourge you in their synagogues.

10:18. And you shall be brought before governors, and before kings for
my sake, for a testimony to them and to the Gentiles:

10:19. But when they shall deliver you up, take no thought how or what
to speak: for it shall be given you in that hour what to speak:

10:20. For it is not you that speak, but the spirit of your Father that
speaketh in you.

10:21. The brother also shall deliver up the brother to death, and the
father the son; and the children shall rise up against their parents,
and shall put them to death.

10:22. And you shall be hated by all men for my name's sake: but he that
shall persevere unto the end, he shall be saved.

10:23. And when they shall persecute you in this city, flee into
another. Amen I say to you, you shall not finish all the cities of
Israel, till the Son of man come.

10:24. The disciple is not above the master, nor the servant above his
lord.

10:25. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the
servant as his lord. If they have called the good man of the house
Beelzebub, how much more them of his household?

10:26. Therefore fear them not. For nothing is covered that shall not be
revealed: nor hid, that shall not be known.

10:27. That which I tell you in the dark, speak ye in the light: and
that which you hear in the ear, preach ye upon the housetops.

10:28. And fear ye not them that kill the body, and are not able to kill
the soul: but rather fear him that can destroy both soul and body in
hell.

10:29. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and not one of them
shall fall on the ground without your Father.

10:30. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.

10:31. Fear not therefore: better are you than many sparrows.

10:32. Every one therefore that shall confess me before men, I will also
confess him before my Father who is in heaven.

10:33. But he that shall deny me before men, I will also deny him before
my Father who is in heaven.

10:34. Do not think that I came to send peace upon earth: I came not to
send peace, but the sword.

10:35. For I came to set a man at variance against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-
in-law.

I came to set a man at variance, etc... Not that this was the end or
design of the coming of our Saviour; but that his coming and his
doctrine would have this effect, by reason of the obstinate resistance
that many would make, and of their persecuting all such as should adhere
to him.

10:36. And a man's enemies shall be they of his own household.

10:37. He that loveth father or mother more than me, is not worthy of
me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of
me.

10:38. And he that taketh not up his cross, and followeth me, is not
worthy of me.

10:39. He that findeth his life, shall lose it: and he that shall lose
his life for me, shall find it.

10:40. He that receiveth you, receiveth me: and he that receiveth me,
receiveth him that sent me.

10:41. He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall
receive the reward of a prophet: and he that receiveth a just man in the
name of a just man, shall receive the reward of a just man.

10:42. And whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a
cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, amen I say to you he
shall not lose his reward.

Matthew Chapter 11

John sends his disciples to Christ, who upbraids the Jews for their
incredulity, and calls to him such as are sensible of their burdens.

11:1. And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his
twelve disciples, he passed from thence, to teach and to preach in their
cities.

11:2. Now when John had heard in prison the works of Christ: sending two
of his disciples he said to him:

11:3. Art thou he that art to come, or look we for another?

11:4. And Jesus making answer said to them: Go and relate to John what
you have heard and seen.

11:5. The blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf
hear, the dead rise again, the poor have the gospel preached to them.

11:6. And blessed is he that shall not be scandalized in me.

Scandalized in me... That is, who shall not take occasion of scandal or
offence from my humility, and the disgraceful death of the cross which I
shall endure.

11:7. And when they went their way, Jesus began to say to the multitudes
concerning John: What went you out into the desert to see? a reed shaken
with the wind?

11:8. But what went you out to see? a man clothed in soft garments?
Behold they that are clothed in soft garments, are in the houses of
kings.

11:9. But what went you out to see? A prophet? Yea I tell you, and more
than a prophet.

11:10. For this is he of whom it is written: Behold I send my angel
before my face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.

11:11. Amen I say to you, there hath not risen among them that are born
of women a greater than John the Baptist: yet he that is the lesser in
the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.

11:12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of
heaven suffereth violence, and the violent bear it away.

Suffereth violence, etc... It is not to be obtained but by main force,
by using violence upon ourselves, by mortification and penance, and
resisting our perverse inclinations.

11:13. For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John:

11:14. And if you will receive it, he is Elias that is to come.

He is Elias, etc... Not in person, but in spirit. St. Luke 1. 17.

11:15. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

11:16. But whereunto shall I esteem this generation to be like? It is
like to children sitting in the market place.

11:17. Who crying to their companions say: We have piped to you, and you
have not danced: we have lamented, and you have not mourned.

11:18. For John came neither eating nor drinking; and they say: He hath
a devil.

11:19. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say: Behold a
man that is a glutton and a wine drinker, a friend of publicans and
sinners. And wisdom is justified by her children.

11:20. Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein were done the most of
his miracles, for that they had not done penance.

11:21. Woe thee, Corozain, woe to thee, Bethsaida: for if in Tyre and
Sidon had been wrought the miracles that have been wrought in you, they
had long ago done penance in sackcloth and ashes.

11:22. But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon
in the day of judgment, than for you.

11:23. And thou Capharnaum, shalt thou be exalted up to heaven?  thou
shalt go down even unto hell. For if in Sodom had been wrought the
miracles that have been wrought in thee, perhaps it had remained unto
this day.

11:24. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land
of Sodom in the day of judgment than for thee.

11:25. At that time Jesus answered and said: I confess to thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to little ones.

11:26. Yea, Father: for so hath it seemed good in thy sight.

11:27. All things are delivered to me by my Father. And no one knoweth
the Son but the Father: neither doth any one know the Father, but the
Son, and he to whom it shall please the Son to reveal him.

11:28. Come to me all you that labor and are burdened, and I will
refresh you.

11:29. Take up my yoke upon you, and learn of me, because I am meek, and
humble of heart: And you shall find rest to your souls.

11:30. For my yoke is sweet and my burden light.

Matthew Chapter 12

Christ reproves the blindness of the Pharisees, and confutes their
attributing his miracles to Satan.

12:1. At that time Jesus went through the corn on the sabbath: and his
disciples being hungry, began to pluck the ears, and to eat.

12:2. And the Pharisees seeing them, said to him: Behold thy disciples
do that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath days.

12:3. But he said to them: Have you not read what David did when he was
hungry, and they that were with him:

12:4. How he entered into the house of God, and did eat the loaves of
proposition, which it was not lawful for him to eat, nor for them that
were with him, but for the priests only?

The loaves of proposition... So were called the twelve loaves which were
placed before the sanctuary in the temple of God.

12:5. Or have ye not read in the law, that on the sabbath days the
priests in the temple break the sabbath, and are without blame?

12:6. But I tell you that there is here a greater than the temple.

12:7. And if you knew what this meaneth: I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice: you would never have condemned the innocent.

12:8. For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath.

12:9. And when he had passed from thence, he came into their synagogues.

12:10. And behold there was a man who had a withered hand, and they
asked him, saying: Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days? that they
might accuse him.

12:11. But he said to them: What man shall there be among you, that hath
one sheep: and if the same fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he
not take hold on it and lift it up?

12:12. How much better is a man than a sheep? Therefore it is lawful to
do a good deed on the sabbath days.

12:13. Then he saith to the man: Stretch forth thy hand; and he
stretched it forth, and it was restored to health even as the other.

12:14. And the Pharisees going out made a consultation against him, how
they might destroy him.

12:15. But Jesus knowing it, retired from thence: and many followed him,
and he healed them all.

12:16. And he charged them that they should not make him known.

12:17. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaias the
prophet, saying:

12:18. Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul
hath been well pleased. I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall shew
judgment to the Gentiles.

12:19. He shall not contend, nor cry out, neither shall any man hear his
voice in the streets.

12:20. The bruised reed he shall not break: and smoking flax he shall
not extinguish: till he send forth judgment unto victory.

12:21. And in his name the Gentiles shall hope.

12:22. Then was offered to him one possessed with a devil, blind and
dumb: and he healed him, so that he spoke and saw.

12:23. And all the multitudes were amazed, and said: Is not this the son
of David?

12:24. But the Pharisees hearing it, said: This man casteth not out
devils but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils.

12:25. And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said to them: Every kingdom
divided against itself shall be made desolate: and every city or house
divided against itself shall not stand.

12:26. And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself: how
then shall his kingdom stand?

12:27. And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children
cast them out? Therefore they shall be your judges.

12:28. But if I by the Spirit of God cast out devils, then is the
kingdom of God come upon you.

12:29. Or how can any one enter into the house of the strong, and rifle
his goods, unless he first bind the strong? and then he will rifle his
house.

12:30. He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathereth not
with me, scattereth.

12:31. Therefore I say to you: Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven
men, but the blasphemy of the Spirit shall not be forgiven.

The blasphemy of the Spirit... The sin here spoken of is that blasphemy,
by which the Pharisees attributed the miracles of Christ, wrought by the
Spirit of God, to Beelzebub the prince of devils. Now this kind of sin
is usually accompanied with so much obstinacy, and such wilful opposing
the Spirit of God, and the known truth, that men who are guilty of it,
are seldom or never converted: and therefore are never forgiven, because
they will not repent. Otherwise there is no sin, which God cannot or
will not forgive to such as sincerely repent, and have recourse to the
keys of the church.

12:32. And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall
be forgiven him: but he that shall speak against the Holy Ghost, it
shall not be forgiven him neither in this world, nor in the world to
come.

Nor in the world to come... From these words St. Augustine (De Civ. Dei,
lib. 21, c. 13) and St. Gregory (Dialog., 4, c. 39) gather, that some
sins may be remitted in the world to come; and, consequently, that there
is a purgatory or a middle place.

12:33. Either make the tree good and its fruit good: or make the tree
evil, and its fruit evil. For by the fruit the tree is known.

12:34. O generation of vipers, how can you speak good things, whereas
you are evil? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.

12:35. A good man out of a good treasure bringeth forth good things: and
an evil man out of an evil treasure bringeth forth evil things.

12:36. But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall render an account for it in the day of judgment.

Every idle word... This shews there must be a place of temporal
punishment hereafter where these slighter faults shall be punished.

12:37. For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou
shalt be condemned.

12:38. Then some of the scribes and Pharisees answered him, saying:
Master, we would see a sign from thee.

A sign... That is, a miracle from heaven. St. Luke 11. 16.

12:39. Who answering said to them: An evil and adulterous generation
seeketh a sign: and a sign shall not be given it, but the sign of Jonas
the prophet.

12:40. For as Jonas was in the whale's belly three days and three
nights: so shall the Son of man be in the heart of the earth three days
and three nights.

Three days, etc... Not complete days and nights; but part of three days,
and three nights taken according to the way that the Hebrews counted
their days and nights, viz., from evening to evening.

12:41. The men of Ninive shall rise in judgment with this generation,
and shall condemn it: because they did penance at the preaching of
Jonas. And behold a greater than Jonas here.

12:42. The queen of the south shall rise in judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it: because she came from the ends of the
earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold a greater than Solomon
here.

12:43. And when an unclean spirit is gone out of a man he walketh
through dry places seeking rest, and findeth none.

12:44. Then he saith: I will return into my house from whence I came
out. And coming he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished.

12:45. Then he goeth, and taketh with him seven other spirits more
wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last
state of that man is made worse than the first. So shall it be also to
this wicked generation.

12:46. As he was yet speaking to the multitudes, behold his mother and
his brethren stood without, seeking to speak to him.

12:47. And one said unto him: Behold thy mother and thy brethren stand
without, seeking thee.

12:48. But he answering him that told him, said: Who is my mother, and
who are my brethren?

Who is my mother?... This was not spoken by way of slighting his mother,
but to shew that we are never to suffer ourselves to be taken from the
service of God, by any inordinate affection to our earthly parents: and
that which our Lord chiefly regarded in his mother, was her doing the
will of his Father in heaven. It may also further allude to the
reprobation of the Jews, his carnal kindred, and the election of the
Gentiles.

12:49. And stretching forth his hand towards his disciples, he said:
Behold my mother and my brethren.

12:50. For whosoever shall do the will of my Father, that is in heaven,
he is my brother, and sister, and mother.

Matthew Chapter 13

The parables of the sower and the cockle: of the mustardseed, etc.

13:1. The same day Jesus going out of the house, sat by the sea side.

13:2. And great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he
went up into a boat and sat: and all the multitude stood on the shore.

13:3. And he spoke to them many things in parables, saying: Behold the
sower went forth to sow.

13:4. And whilst he soweth some fell by the way side, and the birds of
the air came and ate them up.

13:5. And other some fell upon stony ground, where they had not much
earth: and they sprung up immediately, because they had no deepness of
earth.

13:6. And when the sun was up they were scorched: and because they had
not root, they withered away.

13:7. And others fell among thorns: and the thorns grew up and choked
them.

13:8. And others fell upon good ground: and they brought forth fruit,
some an hundred fold, some sixty fold, and some thirty fold.

13:9. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

13:10. And his disciples came and said to him: Why speakest thou to them
in parables?

13:11. Who answered and said to them: Because to you it is given to know
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven: but to them it is not given.

13:12. For he that hath, to him shall be given, and he shall abound: but
he that hath not, from him shall be taken away that also which he hath.

13:13. Therefore do I speak to them in parables: because seeing they see
not, and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.

13:14. And the prophecy of Isaias is fulfilled in them, who saith: By
hearing you shall hear, and shall not understand: and seeing you shall
see, and shall not perceive.

13:15. For the heart of this people is grown gross, and with their ears
they have been dull of hearing, and their eyes they have shut: lest at
any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.

13:16. But blessed are your eyes, because they see, and your ears,
because they hear.

13:17. For, amen, I say to you, many prophets and just men have desired
to see the things that you see, and have not seen them: and to hear the
things that you hear and have not heard them.

13:18. Hear you therefore the parable of the sower.

13:19. When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth
it not, there cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away that which was
sown in his heart: this is he that received the seed by the way side.

13:20. And he that received the seed upon stony ground, is he that
heareth the word, and immediately receiveth it with joy.

13:21. Yet hath he not root in himself, but is only for a time: and when
there ariseth tribulation and persecution because of the word, he is
presently scandalized.

13:22. And he that received the seed among thorns, is he that heareth
the word, and the care of this world and the deceitfulness of riches
choketh up the word, and he becometh fruitless.

13:23. But he that received the seed upon good ground, is he that
heareth the word, and understandeth, and beareth fruit, and yieldeth the
one an hundredfold, and another sixty, and another thirty.

13:24. Another parable he proposed to them, saying: The kingdom of
heaven is likened to a man that sowed good seed in his field.

13:25. But while men were asleep, his enemy came and oversowed cockle
among the wheat and went his way.

13:26. And when the blade was sprung up, and had brought forth fruit,
then appeared also the cockle.

13:27. And the servants of the good man of the house coming said to him.
Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field? Whence then hath it
cockle?

13:28. And he said to them: An enemy hath done this. And the servants
said to him: Wilt thou that we go and gather it up?

13:29. And he said: No, lest perhaps gathering up the cockle, you root
up the wheat also together with it.

13:30. Suffer both to grow until the harvest, and in the time of the
harvest I will say to the reapers: Gather up first the cockle, and bind
it into bundles to burn, but the wheat gather ye into my barn.

13:31. Another parable he proposed unto them, saying: The kingdom of
heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and sowed in
his field.

13:32. Which is the least indeed of all seeds; but when it is grown up,
it is greater than all herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of
the air come, and dwell in the branches thereof.

13:33. Another parable he spoke to them: The kingdom of heaven is like
to leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, until
the whole was leavened.

13:34. All these things Jesus spoke in parables to the multitudes: and
without parables he did not speak to them.

13:35. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet,
saying: I will open my mouth in parables, I will utter things hidden
from the foundation of the world.

13:36. Then having sent away the multitudes, he came into the house, and
his disciples came to him, saying: Expound to us the parable of the
cockle of the field.

13:37. Who made answer and said to them: He that soweth the good seed is
the Son of man.

13:38. And the field is the world. And the good seed are the children of
the kingdom. And the cockle are the children of the wicked one.

13:39. And the enemy that sowed them, is the devil. But the harvest is
the end of the world. And the reapers are the angels.

13:40. Even as cockle therefore is gathered up, and burnt with fire: so
shall it be at the end of the world.

13:41. The Son of man shall send his angels, and they shall gather out
of his kingdom all scandals, and them that work iniquity.

13:42. And shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

13:43. Then shall the just shine as the sun, in the kingdom of their
Father. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

13:44. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hidden in a field.
Which a man having found, hid it, and for joy thereof goeth, and selleth
all that he hath, and buyeth that field.

13:45. Again the kingdom of heaven is like to a merchant seeking good
pearls.

13:46. Who when he had found one pearl of great price, went his way, and
sold all that he had, and bought it.

13:47. Again the kingdom of heaven is like to a net cast into the sea,
and gathering together of all kinds of fishes.

13:48. Which, when it was filled, they drew out, and sitting by the
shore, they chose out the good into vessels, but the bad they cast
forth.

13:49. So shall it be at the end of the world. The angels shall go out,
and shall separate the wicked from among the just.

13:50. And shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

13:51. Have ye understood all these things? They say to him: Yes.

13:52. He said unto them: Therefore every scribe instructed in the
kingdom of heaven, is like to a man that is a householder, who bringeth
forth out of his treasure new things and old.

13:53. And it came to pass: when Jesus had finished these parables, he
passed from thence.

13:54. And coming into his own country, he taught them in their
synagogues, so that they wondered and said: How came this man by this
wisdom and miracles?

13:55. Is not this the carpenter's son? Is not his mother called Mary,
and his brethren James, and Joseph, and Simon, and Jude:

His brethren... These were the children of Mary the wife of Cleophas,
sister to our Blessed Lady, (St. Matt. 27. 56; St.  John 19. 25,) and
therefore, according to the usual style of the Scripture, they were
called brethren, that is, near relations to our Saviour.

13:56. And his sisters, are they not all with us? Whence therefore hath
he all these things?

13:57. And they were scandalized in his regard. But Jesus said to them:
A prophet is not without honour, save in his own country, and in his own
house.

13:58. And he wrought not many miracles there, because of their
unbelief.

Matthew Chapter 14

Herod puts John to death. Christ feeds five thousand in the desert. He
walks upon the sea, and heals all the diseased with the touch of his
garment.

14:1. At that time Herod the Tetrarch heard the fame of Jesus.

Tetrarch... This word, derived from the Greek, signifies one that rules
over the fourth part of a kingdom: as Herod then ruled over Galilee,
which was but the fourth part of the kingdom of his father.

14:2. And he said to his servants: This is John the Baptist: he is risen
from the dead, and therefore mighty works shew forth themselves in him.

14:3. For Herod had apprehended John and bound him, and put him into
prison, because of Herodias, his brother's wife.

14:4. For John said to him: It is not lawful for thee to have her.

14:5. And having a mind to put him to death, he feared the people:
because they esteemed him as a prophet.

14:6. But on Herod's birthday, the daughter of Herodias danced before
them: and pleased Herod.

14:7. Whereupon he promised with an oath, to give her whatsoever she
would ask of him.

14:8. But she being instructed before by her mother, said: Give me here
in a dish the head of John the Baptist.

14:9. And the king was struck sad: yet because of his oath, and for them
that sat with him at table, he commanded it to be given.

14:10. And he sent, and beheaded John in the prison.

14:11. And his head was brought in a dish: and it was given to the
damsel, and she brought it to her mother.

14:12. And his disciples came and took the body, and buried it, and came
and told Jesus.

14:13. Which when Jesus had heard, he retired from thence by a boat,
into a desert place apart, and the multitudes having heard of it,
followed him on foot out of the cities.

14:14. And he coming forth saw a great multitude, and had compassion on
them, and healed their sick.

14:15. And when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying: This
is a desert place, and the hour is now passed: send away the multitudes,
that going into the towns, they may buy themselves victuals.

14:16. But Jesus said to them, They have no need to go: give you them to
eat.

14:17. They answered him: We have not here, but five loaves, and two
fishes.

14:18. Who said to them: Bring them hither to me.

14:19. And when he had commanded the multitude to sit down upon the
grass, he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to
heaven, he blessed, and brake, and gave the loaves to his disciples, and
the disciples to the multitudes.

14:20. And they did all eat, and were filled. And they took up what
remained, twelve full baskets of fragments.

14:21. And the number of them that did eat, was five thousand men,
besides women and children.

14:22. And forthwith Jesus obliged his disciples to go up into the boat,
and to go before him over the water, till he dismissed the people.

14:23. And having dismissed the multitude, he went into a mountain alone
to pray. And when it was evening, he was there alone.

14:24. But the boat in the midst of the sea was tossed with the waves:
for the wind was contrary.

14:25. And in the fourth watch of the night, he came to them walking
upon the sea.

14:26. And they seeing him walking upon the sea, were troubled, saying:
It is an apparition. And they cried out for fear.

14:27. And immediately Jesus spoke to them, saying: Be of good heart: it
is I, fear ye not.

14:28. And Peter making answer, said: Lord, if it be thou, bid me come
to thee upon the waters.

14:29. And he said: Come. And Peter going down out of the boat walked
upon the water to come to Jesus.

14:30. But seeing the wind strong, he was afraid: and when he began to
sink, he cried out, saying: Lord, save me.

14:31. And immediately Jesus stretching forth his hand took hold of him,
and said to him: O thou of little faith, why didst thou doubt?

14:32. And when they were come up into the boat, the wind ceased.

14:33. And they that were in the boat came and adored him, saying:
Indeed thou art the Son of God.

14:34. And having passed the water, they came into the country of
Genesar.

14:35. And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent
into all that country, and brought to him all that were diseased.

14:36. And they besought him that they might touch but the hem of his
garment. And as many as touched, were made whole.

Matthew Chapter 15

Christ reproves the Scribes. He cures the daughter of the woman of
Canaan: and many others: and feeds four thousand with seven loaves.

15:1. Then came to him from Jerusalem scribes and Pharisees, saying:

15:2. Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the ancients? For
they wash not their hands when they eat bread.

15:3. But he answering, said to them: Why do you also transgress the
commandment of God for your tradition? For God said:

15:4. Honour thy father and mother: And: He that shall curse father or
mother, let him die the death.

15:5. But you say: Whosoever shall say to father or mother, The gift
whatsoever proceedeth from me, shall profit thee.

The gift, etc... That is, the offering that I shall make to God, shall
be instead of that which should be expended for thy profit. This
tradition of the Pharisees was calculated to enrich themselves; by
exempting children from giving any further assistance to their parents,
if they once offered to the temple and the priests, that which should
have been the support of their parents. But this was a violation of the
law of God, and of nature, which our Saviour here condemns.

15:6. And he shall not honour his father or his mother: and you have
made void the commandment of God for your tradition.

15:7. Hypocrites, well hath Isaias prophesied of you, saying:

15:8. This people honoureth me with their lips: but their heart is far
from me.

15:9. And in vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines and
commandments of men.

Commandments of men... The doctrines and commandments here reprehended
are such as are either contrary to the law of God, (as that of
neglecting parents, under pretence of giving to God,) or at least are
frivolous, unprofitable, and no ways conducing to true piety, as that of
often washing hands, etc., without regard to the purity of the heart.
But as to the rules and ordinances of the holy church, touching fasts,
festivals, etc., these are no ways repugnant to, but highly agreeable to
God's holy word, and all Christian piety: neither are they to be counted
among the doctrines and commandments of men; because they proceed not
from mere human authority; but from that which Christ has established in
his church; whose pastors he has commanded us to hear and obey, even as
himself. St. Luke 10. 16; St. Matt. 18. 17.

15:10. And having called together the multitudes unto him, he said to
them: Hear ye and understand.

15:11. Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man: but what
cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man.

Not that which goeth into, etc... No uncleanness in meat, nor any dirt
contracted by eating it with unwashed hands, can defile the soul: but
sin alone; or a disobedience of the heart to the ordinance and will of
God. And thus when Adam took the forbidden fruit, it was not the apple,
which entered into the mouth, but the disobedience to the law of God
which defiled him. The same is to be said if a Jew, in the time of the
old law, had eaten swine's flesh; or a Christian convert, in the days of
the apostles, contrary to their ordinance, had eaten blood; or if any of
the faithful at present should transgress the ordinance of God's church,
by breaking the fasts: for in all these cases the soul would be defiled;
not indeed by that which goeth into the mouth; but by the disobedience
of the heart, in wilfully transgressing the ordinance of God, or of
those who have their authority from him.

15:12. Then came his disciples, and said to him: Dost thou know that the
Pharisees, when they heard this word, were scandalized?

15:13. But he answering, said: Every plant which my heavenly Father hath
not planted, shall be rooted up.

15:14. Let them alone: they are blind, and leaders of the blind.  And if
the blind lead the blind, both fall into the pit.

15:15. And Peter answering, said to him: Expound to us this parable.

15:16. But he said: Are you also yet without understanding?

15:17. Do you not understand, that whatsoever entereth into the mouth,
goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the privy?

15:18. But the things which proceed out of the mouth, come forth from
the heart, and those things defile a man.

15:19. For from the heart come forth evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false testimonies, blasphemies.

15:20. These are the things that defile a man. But to eat with unwashed
hands doth not defile a man.

15:21. And Jesus went from thence, and retired into the coast of Tyre
and Sidon.

15:22. And behold a woman of Canaan who came out of those coasts, crying
out, said to him: Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David: my
daughter is grievously troubled by a devil.

15:23. Who answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought
him, saying: Send her away, for she crieth after us:

15:24. And he answering, said: I was not sent but to the sheep, that are
lost of the house of Israel.

15:25. But she came and adored him, saying: Lord, help me.

15:26. Who answering, said: It is not good to take the bread of the
children, and to cast it to the dogs.

15:27. But she said: Yea, Lord; for the whelps also eat of the crumbs
that fall from the table of their masters.

15:28. Then Jesus answering, said to her: O woman, great is thy faith:
be it done to thee as thou wilt: and her daughter was cured from that
hour.

15:29. And when Jesus had passed away from thence, he came nigh the sea
of Galilee: and going up into a mountain, he sat there.

15:30. And there came to him great multitudes, having with them the
dumb, the blind, the lame, the maimed, and many others: and they cast
them down at his feet, and he healed them:

15:31. So that the multitudes marvelled seeing the dumb speak, the lame
walk, the blind see: and they glorified the God of Israel.

15:32. And Jesus called together his disciples, and said: I have
compassion on the multitudes, because they continue with me now three
days, and have not what to eat, and I will not send them away fasting,
lest they faint in the way.

15:33. And the disciples say unto him: Whence then should we have so
many loaves in the desert, as to fill so great a multitude?

15:34. And Jesus said to them: How many loaves have you? But they said:
Seven, and a few little fishes.

15:35. And he commanded the multitude to sit down upon the ground.

15:36. And taking the seven loaves and the fishes, and giving thanks, he
brake, and gave to his disciples, and the disciples gave to the people.

15:37. And they did all eat, and had their fill. And they took up seven
baskets full, of what remained of the fragments.

15:38. And they that did eat, were four thousand men, beside children
and women.

15:39. And having dismissed the multitude, he went up into a boat, and
came into the coasts of Magedan.

Matthew Chapter 16

Christ refuses to shew the Pharisees a sign from heaven. Peter's
confession is rewarded. He is rebuked for opposing Christ's passion. All
his followers must deny themselves.

16:1. And there came to him the Pharisees and Sadducees tempting: and
they asked him to shew them a sign from heaven.

16:2. But he answered and said to them: When it is evening, you say, It
will be fair weather, for the sky is red.

16:3. And in the morning: To day there will be a storm, for the sky is
red and lowering. You know then how to discern the face of the sky: and
can you not know the signs of the times?

16:4. A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign: and a
sign shall not be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet.  And he
left them, and went away.

16:5. And when his disciples were come over the water, they had
forgotten to take bread.

16:6. Who said to them: Take heed and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and Sadducees.

16:7. But they thought within themselves, saying: Because we have taken
no bread.

16:8. And Jesus knowing it, said: Why do you think within yourselves, O
ye of little faith, for that you have no bread?

16:9. Do you not yet understand, neither do you remember the five loaves
among five thousand men, and how many baskets you took up?

16:10. Nor the seven loaves, among four thousand men, and how many
baskets you took up?

16:11. Why do you not understand that it was not concerning bread I said
to you: Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees?

16:12. Then they understood that he said not that they should beware of
the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

16:13. And Jesus came into the quarters of Cesarea Philippi: and he
asked his disciples, saying: Whom do men say that the Son of man is?

16:14. But they said: Some John the Baptist, and other some Elias, and
others Jeremias, or one of the prophets.

16:15. Jesus saith to them: But whom do you say that I am?

16:16. Simon Peter answered and said: Thou art Christ, the Son of the
living God.

16:17. And Jesus answering said to him: Blessed art thou, Simon
Bar-Jona: because flesh and blood hath not revealed it to thee, but my
Father who is in heaven.

16:18. And I say to thee: That thou art Peter; and upon this rock I will
build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

Thou art Peter, etc... As St. Peter, by divine revelation, here made a
solemn profession of his faith of the divinity of Christ; so in
recompense of this faith and profession, our Lord here declares to him
the dignity to which he is pleased to raise him: viz., that he to whom
he had already given the name of Peter, signifying a rock, St. John 1.
42, should be a rock indeed, of invincible strength, for the support of
the building of the church; in which building he should be, next to
Christ himself, the chief foundation stone, in quality of chief pastor,
ruler, and governor; and should have accordingly all fulness of
ecclesiastical power, signified by the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
Upon this rock, etc... The words of Christ to Peter, spoken in the
vulgar language of the Jews which our Lord made use of, were the same as
if he had said in English, Thou art a Rock, and upon this rock I will
build my church. So that, by the plain course of the words, Peter is
here declared to be the rock, upon which the church was to be built:
Christ himself being both the principal foundation and founder of the
same.  Where also note, that Christ, by building his house, that is, his
church, upon a rock, has thereby secured it against all storms and
floods, like the wise builder, St. Matt. 7. 24, 25.  The gates of hell,
etc... That is, the powers of darkness, and whatever Satan can do,
either by himself, or his agents. For as the church is here likened to a
house, or fortress, built on a rock; so the adverse powers are likened
to a contrary house or fortress, the gates of which, that is, the whole
strength, and all the efforts it can make, will never be able to prevail
over the city or church of Christ. By this promise we are fully assured,
that neither idolatry, heresy, nor any pernicious error whatsoever shall
at any time prevail over the church of Christ.

16:19. And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven.  And
whatsoever thou shalt bind upon earth, it shall be bound also in heaven:
and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, it shall be loosed also in
heaven.

Loose on earth... The loosing the bands of temporal punishments due to
sins, is called an indulgence; the power of which is here granted.

16:20. Then he commanded his disciples, that they should tell no one
that he was Jesus the Christ.

16:21. From that time Jesus began to shew to his disciples, that he must
go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the ancients and scribes
and chief priests, and be put to death, and the third day rise again.

16:22. And Peter taking him, began to rebuke him, saying: Lord, be it
far from thee, this shall not be unto thee.

And Peter taking him... That is, taking him aside, out of a tender love,
respect and zeal for his Lord and Master's honour, began to expostulate
with him, as it were to rebuke him, saying, Lord, far be it from thee to
suffer death; but the Lord said to Peter, ver. 23, Go behind me, Satan.
These words may signify, Begone from me; but the holy Fathers expound
them otherwise, that is, come after me, or follow me; and by these words
the Lord would have Peter to follow him in his suffering, and not to
oppose the divine will by contradiction; for the word satan means in
Hebrew an adversary, or one that opposes.

16:23. Who turning, said to Peter: Go behind me, Satan, thou art a
scandal unto me: because thou savourest not the things that are of God,
but the things that are of men.

16:24. Then Jesus said to his disciples: If any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

16:25. For he that will save his life, shall lose it: and he that shall
lose his life for my sake, shall find it.

16:26. For what doth it profit a man, if he gain the whole world and
suffer the loss of his own soul? Or what exchange shall a man give for
his soul?

16:27. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his
angels: and then will he render to every man according to his works.

16:28. Amen I say to you, there are some of them that stand here, that
shall not taste death, till they see the Son of man coming in his
kingdom.

Matthew Chapter 17

The Transfiguration of Christ: He cures the lunatic child: foretells his
passion; and pays the didrachma.

17:1. And after six days Jesus taketh unto him Peter and James, and John
his brother, and bringeth them up into a high mountain apart:

17:2. And he was transfigured before them. And his face did shine as the
sun: and his garments became white as snow.

17:3. And behold there appeared to them Moses and Elias talking with
him.

17:4. And Peter answering, said to Jesus: Lord, it is good for us to be
here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles, one for thee,
and one for Moses, and one for Elias.

17:5. And as he was yet speaking, behold a bright cloud overshadowed
them. And lo a voice out of the cloud, saying: This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased: hear ye him.

17:6. And the disciples hearing fell upon their face, and were very much
afraid.

17:7. And Jesus came and touched them: and said to them: Arise, and fear
not.

17:8. And they lifting up their eyes, saw no one, but only Jesus.

17:9. And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them,
saying: Tell the vision to no man, till the Son of man be risen from the
dead.

17:10. And his disciples asked him, saying: Why then do the scribes say
that Elias must come first?

17:11. But he answering, said to them: Elias indeed shall come, and
restore all things.

17:12. But I say to you, that Elias is already come, and they knew him
not, But have done unto him whatsoever they had a mind. So also the Son
of man shall suffer from them.

17:13. Then the disciples understood, that he had spoken to them of John
the Baptist.

17:14. And when he was come to the multitude, there came to him a man
falling down on his knees before him saying: Lord, have pity on my son,
for he is a lunatic, and suffereth much: for he falleth often into the
fire, and often into the water.

17:15. And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him.

17:16. Then Jesus answered and said: O unbelieving and perverse
generation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer you?
Bring him hither to me.

17:17. And Jesus rebuked him, and the devil went out of him, and the
child was cured from that hour.

17:18. Then came the disciples to Jesus secretly, and said: Why could
not we cast him out?

17:19. Jesus said to them: Because of your unbelief. For, amen I say to
you, if you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, you shall say to this
mountain: Remove from hence hither, and it shall remove: and nothing
shall be impossible to you.

As a grain of mustard seed... That is, a perfect faith; which in its
properties, and its fruits, resembles the grain of mustard seed, in the
parable, chap. 13. 31.

17:20. But this kind is not cast out but by prayer and fasting.

17:21. And when they abode together in Galilee, Jesus said to them: The
Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men:

17:22. And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall rise again.
And they were troubled exceedingly.

17:23. And when they were come to Capharnaum, they that received the
didrachmas, came to Peter, and said to him: Doth not your master pay the
didrachma?

The didrachmas... A didrachma was half a sicle, or half a stater; that
is, about 15d. English: which was a tax laid upon every head for the
service of the temple.

17:24. He said: Yes. And when he was come into the house, Jesus
prevented him, saying: What is thy opinion, Simon? The kings of the
earth, of whom do they receive tribute or custom, of their own children,
or of strangers?

17:25. And he said: Of strangers. Jesus said to him: Then the children
are free.

17:26. But that we may not scandalize them, go to the sea, and cast in a
hook: and that fish which shall first come up, take: and when thou hast
opened it's mouth, thou shalt find a stater: take that, and give it to
them for me and thee.

Matthew Chapter 18

Christ teaches humility, to beware of scandal, and to flee the occasions
of sin: to denounce to the church incorrigible sinners, and to look upon
such as refuse to hear the church as heathens. He promises to his
disciples the power of binding and loosing: and that he will be in the
midst of their assemblies.  No forgiveness for them that will not
forgive.

18:1. At that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying: Who, thinkest
thou, is the greater in the kingdom of heaven?

18:2. And Jesus, calling unto him a little child, set him in the midst
of them.

18:3. And said: amen I say to you, unless you be converted, and become
as little children, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

18:4. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, he
is the greater in the kingdom of heaven.

18:5. And he that shall receive one such little child in my name,
receiveth me.

18:6. But he that shall scandalize one of these little ones that believe
in me, it were better for him that a millstone should be hanged about
his neck, and that he should be drowned in the depth of the sea.

Shall scandalize... That is, shall put a stumblingblock in their way,
and cause them to fall into sin.

18:7. Woe to the world because of scandals. For it must needs be that
scandals come: but nevertheless woe to that man by whom the scandal
cometh.

It must needs be, etc... Viz., considering the wickedness and corruption
of the world.

18:8. And if thy hand, or thy foot, scandalize thee, cut it off, and
cast it from thee. It is better for thee to go into life maimed or lame,
than having two hands or two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire.

Scandalize thee... That is, cause thee to offend.

18:9. And if thy eye scandalize thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee. It is better for thee having one eye to enter into life, than
having two eyes to be cast into hell fire.

18:10. See that you despise not one of these little ones: for I say to
you, that their angels in heaven always see the face of my Father who is
in heaven.

18:11. For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost.

18:12. What think you? If a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them
should go astray: doth he not leave the ninety-nine in the mountains,
and goeth to seek that which is gone astray?

18:13. And if it so be that he find it: Amen I say to you, he rejoiceth
more for that, than for the ninety-nine that went not astray.

18:14. Even so it is not the will of your Father, who is in heaven, that
one of these little ones should perish.

18:15. But if thy brother shall offend against thee, go, and rebuke him
between thee and him alone. If he shall hear thee, thou shalt gain thy
brother.

18:16. And if he will not hear thee, take with thee one or two more:
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may stand.

18:17. And if he will not hear them: tell the church. And if he will not
hear the church, let him be to thee as the heathen and publican.

18:18. Amen I say to you, whatsoever you shall bind upon earth, shall be
bound also in heaven: and whatsoever you shall loose upon earth, shall
be loosed also in heaven.

18:19. Again I say to you, that if two of you shall consent upon earth,
concerning anything whatsoever they shall ask, it shall be done to them
by my Father who is in heaven.

18:20. For where there are two or three gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them.

There am I in the midst of them... This is understood of such assemblies
only as are gathered in the name and authority of Christ; and in unity
of the church of Christ. St. Cyprian, De Unitate Ecclesiae.

18:21. Then came Peter unto him and said: Lord, how often shall my
brother offend against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?

18:22. Jesus saith to him: I say not to thee, till seven times; but till
seventy times seven times.

18:23. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened to a king, who would
take an account of his servants.

18:24. And when he had begun to take the account, one as brought to him,
that owed him ten thousand talents.

Talents... A talent was seven hundred and fifty ounces of silver, which
at the rate of five shillings to the ounce is a hundred and eighty-seven
pounds ten shillings sterling.

18:25. And as he had not wherewith to pay it, his lord commanded that he
should be sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had, and
payment to be made.

18:26. But that servant falling down, besought him, saying: Have
patience with me, and I will pay thee all.

18:27. And the lord of that servant being moved with pity, let him go
and forgave him the debt.

18:28. But when that servant was gone out, he found one of his fellow-
servants that owed him an hundred pence: and laying hold of him, he
throttled him, saying: Pay what thou owest.

Pence... The Roman penny was the eighth part of an ounce, that is, about
sevenpence half-penny English.

18:29. And his fellow-servant falling down, besought him, saying: Have
patience with me, and I will pay thee all.

18:30. And he would not: but went and cast him into prison, till he paid
the debt.

18:31. Now his fellow servants seeing what was done, were very much
grieved, and they came, and told their lord all that was done.

18:32. Then his lord called him: and said to him: Thou wicked servant, I
forgave thee all the debt, because thou besoughtest me:

18:33. Shouldst not thou then have had compassion also on thy fellow
servant, even as I had compassion on thee?

18:34. And his lord being angry, delivered him to the torturers until he
paid all the debt.

18:35. So also shall my heavenly Father do to you, if you forgive not
every one his brother from your hearts.

Matthew Chapter 19

Christ declares matrimony to be indissoluble: he recommends the making
one's self an eunuch for the kingdom of heaven; and parting with all
things for him. He shews the danger of riches, and the reward of leaving
all to follow him.

19:1. And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these words, he departed
from Galilee and came into the coasts of Judea, beyond Jordan.

19:2. And great multitudes followed him: and he healed them there.

19:3. And there came to him the Pharisees tempting him, saying: Is it
lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?

19:4. Who answering, said to them: Have ye not read, that he who made
man from the beginning, made them male and female? And he said:

19:5. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall
cleave to his wife, and they two shall be in one flesh.

19:6. Therefore now they are not two, but one flesh. What therefore God
hath joined together, let no man put asunder.

19:7. They say to him: Why then did Moses command to give a bill of
divorce, and to put away?

19:8. He saith to them: Because Moses by reason of the hardness of your
heart permitted you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it
was not so.

19:9. And I say to you, that whosoever shall put away his wife, except
it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and
he that shall marry her that is put away, committeth adultery.

Except it be, etc... In the case of fornication, that is, of adultery,
the wife may be put away: but even then the husband cannot marry another
as long as the wife is living.

19:10. His disciples say unto him: If the case of a man with his wife be
so, it is not expedient to marry.

19:11. Who said to them: All men take not this word, but they to whom it
is given.

All men take not this word... That is, all receive not the gift of
living singly and chastely, unless they pray for the grace of God to
enable them to live so, and for some it may be necessary to that end to
fast as well as pray: and to those it is given from above.

19:12. For there are eunuchs, who were born so from their mothers womb:
and there are eunuchs, who were made so by men: and there are eunuchs,
who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven. He that can
take, let him take it.

There are eunuchs, who have made themselves eunuchs, for the kingdom of
heaven... This text is not to be taken in the literal sense; but means,
that there are such, who have taken a firm and commendable resolution of
leading a single and chaste life, in order to serve God in a more
perfect state than those who marry: as St. Paul clearly shews. 1 Cor. 7.
37, 38.

19:13. Then were little children presented to him, that he should impose
hands upon them and pray. And the disciples rebuked them.

19:14. But Jesus said to them: Suffer the little children, and forbid
them not to come to me: for the kingdom of heaven is for such.

19:15. And when he had imposed hands upon them, he departed from thence.

19:16. And behold one came and said to him: Good master, what good shall
I do that I may have life everlasting?

19:17. Who said to him: Why askest thou me concerning good? One is good,
God. But if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.

19:18. He said to him: Which? And Jesus said: Thou shalt do no murder,
Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not
bear false witness.

19:19. Honour thy father and thy mother: and, Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself.

19:20. The young man saith to him: All these have I kept from my youth,
what is yet wanting to me?

19:21. Jesus saith to him: If thou wilt be perfect, go sell what thou
hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and
come, follow me.

19:22. And when the young man had heard this word, he went away sad: for
he had great possessions.

19:23. Then Jesus said to his disciples: Amen, I say to you, that a rich
man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.

19:24. And again I say to you: It is easier for a camel to pass through
the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

19:25. And when they had heard this, the disciples wondered much,
saying: Who then can be saved?

19:26. And Jesus beholding, said to them: With men this is impossible:
but with God all things are possible.

19:27. Then Peter answering, said to him: Behold we have left all
things, and have followed thee: what therefore shall we have?

19:28. And Jesus said to them: Amen I say to you, that you who have
followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit on the
seat of his majesty, you also shall sit on twelve seats judging the
twelve tribes of Israel.

19:29. And every one that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my name's sake,
shall receive an hundredfold, and shall possess life everlasting.

19:30. And many that are first, shall be last: and the last shall be
first.

Matthew Chapter 20

The parable of the labourers in the vineyard. The ambition of the two
sons of Zebedee. Christ gives sight to two blind men.

20:1. The kingdom of heaven is like to an householder, who went out
early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard.

20:2. And having agreed with the labourers for a penny a day, he sent
them into his vineyard.

20:3. And going out about the third hour, he saw others standing in the
marketplace idle.

20:4. And he said to them: Go you also into my vineyard, and I will give
you what shall be just.

20:5. And they went their way. And again he went out about the sixth and
the ninth hour, and did in like manner.

20:6. But about the eleventh hour he went out and found others standing,
and he saith to them: Why stand you here all the day idle?

20:7. They say to him: Because no man hath hired us. He saith to them:
Go ye also into my vineyard.

20:8. And when evening was come, the lord of the vineyard saith to his
steward: Call the labourers and pay them their hire, beginning from the
last even to the first.

20:9. When therefore they were come that came about the eleventh hour,
they received every man a penny.

20:10. But when the first also came, they thought that they should
receive more: And they also received every man a penny.

20:11. And receiving it they murmured against the master of the house,

20:12. Saying: These last have worked but one hour, and thou hast made
them equal to us, that have borne the burden of the day and the heats.

20:13. But he answering said to one of them: friend, I do thee no wrong:
didst thou not agree with me for a penny?

20:14. Take what is thine, and go thy way: I will also give to this last
even as to thee.

20:15. Or, is it not lawful for me to do what I will? Is thy eye evil,
because I am good?

What I will... Viz., with my own, and in matters that depend on my own
bounty.

20:16. So shall the last be first and the first last. For many are
called but few chosen.

20:17. And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve disciples apart
and said to them:

20:18. Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be
betrayed to the chief priests and the scribes: and they shall condemn
him to death.

20:19. And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to be mocked and scourged
and crucified: and the third day he shall rise again.

20:20. Then came to him the mother of the sons of Zebedee with her sons,
adoring and asking something of him.

20:21. Who said to her: What wilt thou? She saith to him: say that these
my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on thy
left, in thy kingdom.

20:22. And Jesus answering, said: You know not what you ask. Can you
drink the chalice that I shall drink? They say to him: We can.

20:23. He saith to them: My chalice indeed you shall drink; but to sit
on my right or left hand is not mine to give to you, but to them for
whom it is prepared by my Father.

20:24. And the ten, hearing it, were moved with indignation against the
two brethren.

20:25. But Jesus called them to him and said: You know that the princes
of the Gentiles lord it over them; and that they that are the greater,
exercise power upon them.

20:26. It shall not be so among you: but whosoever is the greater among
you, let him be your minister.

20:27. And he that will be first among you shall be your servant.

20:28. Even as the Son of man is not come to be ministered unto, but to
minister and to give his life a redemption for many.

20:29. And when they went out from Jericho, a great multitude followed
him.

20:30. And behold two blind men sitting by the way side heard that Jesus
passed by. And they cried out, saying: O Lord, thou son of David, have
mercy on us.

20:31. And the multitude rebuked them that they should hold their peace.
But they cried out the more, saying: O Lord, thou son of David, have
mercy on us.

20:32. And Jesus stood and called them and said: What will ye that I do
to you?

20:33. They say to him: Lord, that our eyes be opened.

20:34. And Jesus having compassion on them, touched their eyes.  And
immediately they saw and followed him.

Matthew Chapter 21

Christ rides into Jerusalem upon an ass. He casts the buyers and sellers
out of the temple, curses the fig tree and puts to silence the priests
and scribes.

21:1. And when they drew nigh to Jerusalem and were come to Bethphage,
unto mount Olivet, then Jesus sent two disciples,

21:2. Saying to them: Go ye into the village that is over against you:
and immediately you shall find an ass tied and a colt with her. Loose
them and bring them to me.

21:3. And if any man shall say anything to you, say ye that the Lord
hath need of them. And forthwith he will let them go.

21:4. Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
by the prophet, saying:

21:5. Tell ye the daughter of Sion: Behold thy king cometh to thee, meek
and sitting upon an ass and a colt, the foal of her that is used to the
yoke.

21:6. And the disciples going, did as Jesus commanded them.

21:7. And they brought the ass and the colt and laid their garments upon
them and made him sit thereon.

21:8. And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way: and
others cut boughs from the trees and strewed them in the way.

21:9. And the multitudes that went before and that followed cried,
saying: Hosanna to the son of David: Blessed is he that cometh in the
name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest.

21:10. And when he was come into Jerusalem, the whole city was moved,
saying: Who is this?

21:11. And the people said: This is Jesus, the prophet from Nazareth of
Galilee.

21:12. And Jesus went into the temple of God and cast out all them that
sold and bought in the temple and overthrew the tables of the money
changers and the chairs of them that sold doves.

21:13. And he saith to them: It is written, My house shall be called the
house of prayer; but you have made it a den of thieves.

21:14. And there came to him the blind and the lame in the temple: and
he healed them.

21:15. And the chief priests and scribes, seeing the wonderful things
that he did and the children crying in the temple and saying: Hosanna to
the son of David, were moved with indignation,

21:16. And said to him: Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus said to
them: Yea, have you never read: Out of the mouth of infants and of
sucklings thou hast perfected praise?

21:17. And leaving them, he went out of the city into Bethania and
remained there.

21:18. And in the morning, returning into the city, he was hungry.

21:19. And seeing a certain fig tree by the way side, he came to it and
found nothing on it but leaves only. And he saith to it: May no fruit
grow on thee henceforward for ever. And immediately the fig tree
withered away.

21:20. And the disciples seeing it wondered, saying: How is it presently
withered away?

21:21. And Jesus answering, said to them: Amen, I say to you, if you
shall have faith and stagger not, not only this of the fig tree shall
you do, but also if you shall say to this mountain, Take up and cast
thyself into the sea, it shall be done.

21:22. And all things whatsoever you shall ask in prayer believing, you
shall receive.

21:23. And when he was come into the temple, there came to him, as he
was teaching, the chief priests and ancients of the people, saying: By
what authority dost thou these things? And who hath given thee this
authority?

21:24. Jesus answering, said to them: I also will ask you one word,
which if you shall tell me, I will also tell you by what authority I do
these things.

21:25. The baptism of John, whence was it? From heaven or from men? But
they thought within themselves, saying:

21:26. If we shall say, from heaven, he will say to us: Why then did you
not believe him? But if we shall say, from men, we are afraid of the
multitude: for all held John as a prophet.

21:27. And answering Jesus, they said: We know not. He also said to
them: Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.

21:28. But what think you? A certain man had two sons: and coming to the
first, he said: Son, go work to day in my vineyard.

21:29. And he answering, said: I will not. But afterwards, being moved
with repentance, he went.

21:30. And coming to the other, he said in like manner. And he answering
said: I go, Sir. And he went not.

21:31. Which of the two did the father's will? They say to him: The
first. Jesus saith to them: Amen I say to you that the publicans and the
harlots shall go into the kingdom of God before you.

21:32. For John came to you in the way of justice: and you did not
believe him. But the publicans and the harlots believed him: but you,
seeing it, did not even afterwards repent, that you might believe him.

21:33. Hear ye another parable. There was a man, an householder, who
planted a vineyard and made a hedge round about it and dug in it a press
and built a tower and let it out to husbandmen and went into a strange
country.

21:34. And when the time of the fruits drew nigh, he sent his servants
to the husbandmen that they might receive the fruits thereof.

21:35. And the husbandmen laying hands on his servants, beat one and
killed another and stoned another.

21:36. Again he sent other servants, more than the former; and they did
to them in like manner.

21:37. And last of all he sent to them his son, saying: They will
reverence my son.

21:38. But the husbandmen seeing the son, said among themselves: This is
the heir: come, let us kill him, and we shall have his inheritance.

21:39. And taking him, they cast him forth out of the vineyard and
killed him.

21:40. When therefore the lord of the vineyard shall come, what will he
do to those husbandmen?

21:41. They say to him: He will bring those evil men to an evil end and
let out his vineyard to other husbandmen that shall render him the fruit
in due season.

21:42. Jesus saith to them: Have you never read in the Scriptures: The
stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the
corner? By the Lord this has been done; and it is wonderful in our eyes.

21:43. Therefore I say to you that the kingdom of God shall be taken
from you and shall be given to a nation yielding the fruits thereof.

21:44. And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder.

21:45. And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables,
they knew that he spoke of them.

21:46. And seeking to lay hands on him, they feared the multitudes,
because they held him as a prophet.

Matthew Chapter 22

The parable of the marriage feast. Christ orders tribute to be paid to
Caesar. He confutes the Sadducees, shews which is the first commandment
in the law and puzzles the Pharisees.

22:1. And Jesus answering, spoke again in parables to them, saying:

22:2. The kingdom of heaven is likened to a king who made a marriage for
his son.

22:3. And he sent his servants to call them that were invited to the
marriage: and they would not come.

22:4. Again he sent other servants, saying: Tell them that were invited,
Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my beeves and fatlings are killed,
and all things are ready. Come ye to the marriage.

22:5. But they neglected and went their ways, one to his farm and
another to his merchandise.

22:6. And the rest laid hands on his servants and, having treated them
contumeliously, put them to death.

22:7. But when the king had heard of it, he was angry: and sending his
armies, he destroyed those murderers and burnt their city.

22:8. Then he saith to his servants: The marriage indeed is ready; but
they that were invited were not worthy.

22:9. Go ye therefore into the highways; and as many as you shall find,
call to the marriage.

22:10. And his servants going forth into the ways, gathered together all
that they found, both bad and good: and the marriage was filled with
guests.

22:11. And the king went in to see the guests: and he saw there a man
who had not on a wedding garment.

22:12. And he saith to him: Friend, how camest thou in hither not having
on a wedding garment? But he was silent.

22:13. Then the king said to the waiters: Bind his hands and feet, and
cast him into the exterior darkness. There shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth.

22:14. For many are called, but few are chosen.

22:15. Then the Pharisees going, consulted among themselves how to
insnare him in his speech.

22:16. And they sent to him their disciples with the Herodians, saying:
Master, we know that thou art a true speaker and teachest the way of God
in truth. Neither carest thou for any man: for thou dost not regard the
person of men.

The Herodians... That is, some that belonged to Herod, and that joined
with him in standing up for the necessity of paying tribute to Caesar,
that is, to the Roman emperor. Some are of opinion that there was a sect
among the Jews called Herodians, from their maintaining that Herod was
the Messias.

22:17. Tell us therefore what dost thou think? Is it lawful to give
tribute to Caesar, or not?

22:18. But Jesus knowing their wickedness, said: Why do you tempt me, ye
hypocrites?

22:19. Shew me the coin of the tribute. And they offered him a penny.

22:20. And Jesus saith to them: Whose image and inscription is this?

22:21. They say to him: Caesar's. Then he saith to them: Render
therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and to God, the things
that are God's.

22:22. And hearing this, they wondered and, leaving him, went their
ways.

22:23. That day there came to him the Sadducees, who say there is no
resurrection; and asked him,

22:24. Saying: Master, Moses said: If a man die having no son, his
brother shall marry his wife and raise up issue to his brother.

22:25. Now there were with us seven brethren: and the first having
married a wife, died; and not having issue, left his wife to his
brother.

22:26. In like manner the second and the third and so on, to the
seventh.

22:27. And last of all the woman died also.

22:28. At the resurrection therefore, whose wife of the seven shall she
be? For they all had her.

22:29. And Jesus answering, said to them: You err, not knowing the
Scriptures nor the power of God.

22:30. For in the resurrection they shall neither marry nor be married,
but shall be as the angels of God in heaven.

22:31. And concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you not read
that which was spoken by God, saying to you:

22:32. I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of
Jacob? He is not the God of the dead but of the living.

22:33. And the multitudes hearing it were in admiration at his doctrine.

22:34. But the Pharisees, hearing that he had silenced the Sadducees,
came together.

22:35. And one of them, a doctor of the law, asked him, tempting him:

22:36. Master, which is the great commandment in the law?

22:37. Jesus said to him: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy
whole heart and with thy whole soul and with thy whole mind.

22:38. This is the greatest and the first commandment.

22:39. And the second is like to this: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself.

22:40. On these two commandments dependeth the whole law and the
prophets.

22:41. And the Pharisees being gathered together, Jesus asked them,

22:42. Saying: What think you of Christ? Whose son is he? They say to
him: David's.

22:43. He saith to them: How then doth David in spirit call him Lord,
saying:

22:44. The Lord said to my Lord: Sit on my right hand, until I make thy
enemies thy footstool?

22:45. If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?

22:46. And no man was able to answer him a word: neither durst any man
from that day forth ask him any more questions.

Matthew Chapter 23

Christ admonishes the people to follow the good doctrine, not the bad
example of the scribes and Pharisees. He warns his disciples not to
imitate their ambition and denounces divers woes against them for their
hypocrisy and blindness.

23:1. Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to his disciples,

23:2. Saying: The scribes and the Pharisees have sitten on the chair of
Moses.

23:3. All things therefore whatsoever they shall say to you, observe and
do: but according to their works do ye not. For they say, and do not.

23:4. For they bind heavy and insupportable burdens and lay them on
men's shoulders: but with a finger of their own they will not move them.

23:5. And all their works they do for to be seen of men. For they make
their phylacteries broad and enlarge their fringes.

Phylacteries... that is, parchments, on which they wrote the ten
commandments, and carried them on their foreheads before their eyes:
which the Pharisees affected to wear broader than other men; so to seem
more zealous for the law.

23:6. And they love the first places at feasts and the first chairs in
the synagogues,

23:7. And salutations in the market place, and to be called by men,
Rabbi.

23:8. But be not you called Rabbi. For one is your master: and all you
are brethren.

23:9. And call none your father upon earth; for one is your father, who
is in heaven.

Call none your father--Neither be ye called masters, etc...  The
meaning is that our Father in heaven is incomparably more to be
regarded, than any father upon earth: and no master to be followed, who
would lead us away from Christ. But this does not hinder but that we are
by the law of God to have a due respect both for our parents and
spiritual fathers, (1 Cor. 4.  23:15,) and for our masters and teachers.

23:10. Neither be ye called masters: for one is your master, Christ.

23:11. He that is the greatest among you shall be your servant.

23:12. And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be humbled: and he that
shall humble himself shall be exalted.

23:13. But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because you
shut the kingdom of heaven against men: for you yourselves do not enter
in and those that are going in, you suffer not to enter.

23:14. Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because you devour
the houses of widows, praying long prayers. For this you shall receive
the greater judgment.

23:15. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because you go
round about the sea and the land to make one proselyte. And when he is
made, you make him the child of hell twofold more than yourselves.

23:16. Woe to you, blind guides, that say, Whosoever shall swear by the
temple, it is nothing; but he that shall swear by the gold of the temple
is a debtor.

23:17. Ye foolish and blind: for whether is greater, the gold or the
temple that sanctifieth the gold?

23:18. And whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but
whosoever shall swear by the gift that is upon it is a debtor.

23:19. Ye foolish and blind: for whether is greater, the gift or the
altar that sanctifieth the gift?

23:20. He therefore that sweareth by the altar sweareth by it and by all
things that are upon it.

23:21. And whosoever shall swear by the temple sweareth by it and by him
that dwelleth in it.

23:22. And he that sweareth by heaven sweareth by the throne of God and
by him that sitteth thereon.

23:23. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; because you tithe
mint and anise and cummin and have left the weightier things of the law:
judgment and mercy and faith. These things you ought to have done and
not to leave those undone.

23:24. Blind guides, who strain out a gnat and swallow a camel.

23:25. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; because you make
clean the outside of the cup and of the dish, but within you are full of
rapine and uncleanness.

23:26. Thou blind Pharisee, first make clean the inside of the cup and
of the dish, that the outside may become clean.

23:27. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; because you are
like to whited sepulchres, which outwardly appear to men beautiful but
within are full of dead men's bones and of all filthiness.

23:28. So you also outwardly indeed appear to men just: but inwardly you
are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

23:29. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, that build the
sepulchres of the prophets and adorn the monuments of the just,

Build the sepulchres, etc... This is not blamed, as if it were in itself
evil to build or adorn the monuments of the prophets: but the hypocrisy
of the Pharisees is here taxed; who, whilst they pretended to honour the
memory of the prophets, were persecuting even unto death the Lord of the
prophets.

23:30. And say: If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not
have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.

23:31. Wherefore you are witnesses against yourselves, that you are the
sons of them that killed the prophets.

23:32. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.

23:33. You serpents, generation of vipers, how will you flee from the
judgment of hell?

23:34. Therefore behold I send to you prophets and wise men and scribes:
and some of them you will put to death and crucify: and some you will
scourge in your synagogues and persecute from city to city.

23:35. That upon you may come all the just blood that hath been shed
upon the earth, from the blood of Abel the just, even unto the blood of
Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom you killed between the temple and
the altar.

That upon you may come, etc... Not that they should suffer more than
their own sins justly deserved; but that the justice of God should now
fall upon them with such a final vengeance, once for all, as might
comprise all the different kinds of judgments and punishments, that had
at any time before been inflicted for the shedding of just blood.

23:36. Amen I say to you, all these things shall come upon this
generation.

23:37. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets and stonest
them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered together
thy children, as the hen doth gather her chickens under her wings, and
thou wouldst not?

23:38. Behold, your house shall be left to you, desolate.

23:39. For I say to you, you shall not see me henceforth till you say:
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.

Matthew Chapter 24

Christ foretells the destruction of the temple, with the signs that
shall come before it and before the last judgment. We must always watch.

24:1. And Jesus being come out of the temple, went away. And his
disciples came to shew him the buildings of the temple.

24:2. And he answering, said to them: Do you see all these things?  Amen
I say to you, there shall not be left here a stone upon a stone that
shall not be destroyed.

24:3. And when he was sitting on mount Olivet, the disciples came to him
privately, saying: Tell us when shall these things be?  And what shall
be the sign of thy coming and of the consummation of the world?

24:4. And Jesus answering, said to them: Take heed that no man seduce
you.

24:5. For many will come in my name saying, I am Christ. And they will
seduce many.

24:6. And you shall hear of wars and rumours of wars. See that ye be not
troubled. For these things must come to pass: but the end is not yet.

24:7. For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom:
And there shall be pestilences and famines and earthquakes in places.

24:8. Now all these are the beginnings of sorrows.

24:9. Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted and shall put you
to death: and you shall be hated by all nations for my name's sake.

24:10. And then shall many be scandalized and shall betray one another
and shall hate one another.

24:11. And many false prophets shall rise and shall seduce many.

24:12. And because iniquity hath abounded, the charity of many shall
grow cold.

24:13. But he that shall persevere to the end, he shall be saved.

24:14. And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in the whole
world, for a testimony to all nations: and then shall the consummation
come.

24:15. When therefore you shall see the abomination of desolation, which
was spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place: he that
readeth let him understand.

24:16. Then they that are in Judea, let them flee to the mountains:

24:17. And he that is on the housetop, let him not come down to take any
thing out of his house:

24:18. And he that is in the field, let him not go back to take his
coat.

24:19. And woe to them that are with child and that give suck in those
days.

24:20. But pray that your flight be not in the winter or on the sabbath.

24:21. For there shall be then great tribulation, such as hath not been
from the beginning of the world until now, neither shall be.

24:22. And unless those days had been shortened, no flesh should be
saved: but for the sake of the elect those days shall be shortened.

24:23. Then if any man shall say to you, Lo here is Christ, or there: do
not believe him.

24:24. For there shall arise false Christs and false prophets and shall
shew great signs and wonders, insomuch as to deceive (if possible) even
the elect.

24:25. Behold I have told it to you, beforehand.

24:26. If therefore they shall say to you, Behold he is in the desert:
go ye not out. Behold he is in the closets: believe it not.

24:27. For as lightning cometh out of the east and appeareth even into
the west: so shall also the cowling of the Son of man be.

24:28. Wheresoever the body shall be, there shall the eagles also be
gathered together.

Wheresoever, etc... The coming of Christ shall be sudden, and manifest
to all the world, like lightning: and wheresoever he shall come, thither
shall all mankind be gathered to him, as eagles are gathered about a
dead body.

24:29. And immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun
shall be darkened and the moon shall not give her light and the stars
shall fall from heaven and the powers of heaven shall be moved.

The stars... Or flaming meteors resembling stars.

24:30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven.  And
then shall all tribes of the earth mourn: and they shall see the Son of
man coming in the clouds of heaven with much power and majesty.

The sign, etc... The cross of Christ.

24:31. And he shall send his angels with a trumpet and a great voice:
and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from the
farthest parts of the heavens to the utmost bounds of them.

24:32. And from the fig tree learn a parable: When the branch thereof is
now tender and the leaves come forth, you know that summer is nigh.

24:33. So you also, when you shall see all these things, know ye that it
is nigh, even at the doors.

24:34. Amen I say to you that this generation shall not pass till all
these things be done.

24:35. Heaven and earth shall pass: but my words shall not pass.

Shall pass... Because they shall be changed at the end of the world into
a new heaven and new earth.

24:36. But of that day and hour no one knoweth: no, not the angels of
heaven, but the Father alone.

24:37. And as in the days of Noe, so shall also the coming of the Son of
man be.

24:38. For, as in the days before the flood they were eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, even till that day in which
Noe entered into the ark:

24:39. And they knew not till the flood came and took them all away: so
also shall the coming of the Son of man be.

24:40. Then two shall be in the field. One shall be taken and one shall
be left.

24:41. Two women shall be grinding at the mill. One shall be taken and
one shall be left.

24:42. Watch ye therefore, because you know not what hour your Lord will
come.

24:43. But this know ye, that, if the goodman of the house knew at what
hour the thief would come, he would certainly watch and would not suffer
his house to be broken open.

24:44. Wherefore be you also ready, because at what hour you know not
the Son of man will come.

24:45. Who, thinkest thou, is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord
hath appointed over his family, to give them meat in season?

24:46. Blessed is that servant, whom when his lord shall come he shall
find so doing.

24:47. Amen I say to you: he shall place him over all his goods.

24:48. But if that evil servant shall say in his heart: My lord is long
a coming:

24:49. And shall begin to strike his fellow servants and shall eat and
drink with drunkards:

24:50. The lord of that servant shall come in a day that he hopeth not
and at an hour that he knoweth not:

24:51. And shall separate him and appoint his portion with the
hypocrites. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Matthew Chapter 25

The parable of the ten virgins and of the talents. The description of
the last judgment.

25:1. Then shall the kingdom of heaven be like to ten virgins, who
taking their lamps went out to meet the bridegroom and the bride.

25:2. And five of them were foolish and five wise.

25:3. But the five foolish, having taken their lamps, did not take oil
with them.

25:4. But the wise took oil in their vessels with the lamps.

25:5. And the bridegroom tarrying, they all slumbered and slept.

25:6. And at midnight there was a cry made: Behold the bridegroom
cometh. Go ye forth to meet him.

25:7. Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps.

25:8. And the foolish said to the wise: Give us of your oil, for our
lamps are gone out.

25:9. The wise answered, saying: Lest perhaps there be not enough for us
and for you, go ye rather to them that sell and buy for yourselves.

25:10. Now whilst they went to buy the bridegroom came: and they that
were ready went in with him to the marriage. And the door was shut.

25:11. But at last came also the other virgins, saying: Lord, Lord, open
to us.

25:12. But he answering said: Amen I say to you, I know you not.

25:13. Watch ye therefore, because you know not the day nor the hour.

25:14. For even as a man going into a far country called his servants
and delivered to them his goods;

25:15. And to one he gave five talents, and to another two, and to
another one, to every one according to his proper ability: and
immediately he took his journey.

25:16. And he that had received the five talents went his way and traded
with the same and gained other five.

25:17. And in like manner he that had received the two gained other two.

25:18. But he that had received the one, going his way, digged into the
earth and hid his lord's money.

25:19. But after a long time the lord of those servants came and
reckoned with them.

25:20. And he that had received the five talents coming, brought other
five talents, saying: Lord, thou didst deliver to me five talents.
Behold I have gained other five over and above.

25:21. His lord said to him: Well done, good and faithful servant,
because thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will place thee
over many things. Enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

25:22. And he also that had received the two talents came and said:
Lord, thou deliveredst two talents to me. Behold I have gained other
two.

25:23. His lord said to him: Well done, good and faithful servant:
because thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will place thee
over many things. Enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

25:24. But he that had received the one talent, came and said: Lord, I
know that thou art a hard man; thou reapest where thou hast not sown and
gatherest where thou hast not strewed.

25:25. And being afraid, I went and hid thy talent in the earth.  Behold
here thou hast that which is thine.

25:26. And his lord answering, said to him: Wicked and slothful servant,
thou knewest that I reap where I sow not and gather where I have not
strewed.

25:27. Thou oughtest therefore to have committed my money to the
bankers: and at my coming I should have received my own with usury.

25:28. Take ye away therefore the talent from him and give it him that
hath ten talents.

25:29. For to every one that hath shall be given, and he shall abound:
but from him that hath not, that also which he seemeth to have shall be
taken away.

25:30. And the unprofitable servant, cast ye out into the exterior
darkness. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

25:31. And when the Son of man shall come in his majesty, and all the
angels with him, then shall he sit upon the seat of his majesty.

25:32. And all nations shall be gathered together before him: and he
shall separate them one from another, as the shepherd separateth the
sheep from the goats:

25:33. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on
his left.

25:34. Then shall the king say to them that shall be on his right hand:
Come, ye blessed of my Father, possess you the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world.

25:35. For I was hungry, and you gave me to eat: I was thirsty, and you
gave me to drink: I was a stranger, and you took me in:

25:36. Naked, and you covered me: sick, and you visited me: I was in
prison, and you came to me.

25:37. Then shall the just answer him, saying: Lord, when did we see
thee hungry and fed thee: thirsty and gave thee drink?

25:38. Or when did we see thee a stranger and took thee in? Or naked and
covered thee?

25:39. Or when did we see thee sick or in prison and came to thee?

25:40. And the king answering shall say to them: Amen I say to you, as
long as you did it to one of these my least brethren, you did it to me.

25:41. Then he shall say to them also that shall be on his left hand:
Depart from me, you cursed, into everlasting fire, which was prepared
for the devil and his angels.

25:42. For I was hungry and you gave me not to eat: I was thirsty and
you gave me not to drink.

25:43. I was a stranger and you took me not in: naked and you covered me
not: sick and in prison and you did not visit me.

25:44. Then they also shall answer him, saying: Lord, when did we see
thee hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and
did not minister to thee?

25:45. Then he shall answer them, saying: Amen: I say to you, as long as
you did it not to one of these least, neither did you do it to me.

25:46. And these shall go into everlasting punishment: but the just,
into life everlasting.

Matthew Chapter 26

The Jews conspire against Christ. He is anointed by Mary. The treason of
Judas. The last supper. The prayer in the garden.  The apprehension of
our Lord. His treatment in the house of Caiphas.

26:1. And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended all these words, he said
to his disciples:

26:2. You know that after two days shall be the pasch: and the Son of
man shall be delivered up to be crucified.

26:3. Then were gathered together the chief priests and ancients of the
people, into the court of the high priest, who was called Caiphas:

26:4. And they consulted together that by subtilty they might apprehend
Jesus and put him to death.

26:5. But they said: Not on the festival day, lest perhaps there should
be a tumult among the people.

26:6. And when Jesus was in Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper,

26:7. There came to him a woman having an alabaster box of precious
ointment and poured it on his head as he was at table.

26:8. And the disciples seeing it had indignation, saying: To what
purpose is this waste?

26:9. For this might have been sold for much and given to the poor.

26:10. And Jesus knowing it, said to them: Why do you trouble this
woman? For she hath wrought a good work upon me.

26:11. For the poor you have always with you: but me you have not
always.

Me you have not always... Viz., in a visible manner, as when conversant
here on earth; and as we have the poor, whom we may daily assist and
relieve.

26:12. For she in pouring this ointment on my body hath done it for my
burial.

26:13. Amen I say to you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in
the whole world, that also which she hath done shall be told for a
memory of her.

26:14. Then went one of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, to
the chief priests.

26:15. And said to them: What will you give me, and I will deliver him
unto you? But they appointed him thirty pieces of silver.

26:16. And from thenceforth he sought opportunity to betray him.

26:17. And on the first day of the Azymes, the disciples came to Jesus,
saying: Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the pasch?

Azymes... Feast of the unleavened bread. Pasch... The paschal lamb.

26:18. But Jesus said: Go ye into the city to a certain man and say to
him: The master saith, My time is near at hand. With thee I make the
pasch with my disciples.

26:19. And the disciples did as Jesus appointed to them: and they
prepared the pasch.

26:20. But when it was evening, he sat down with his twelve disciples.

26:21. And whilst they were eating, he said: Amen I say to you that one
of you is about to betray me.

26:22. And they being very much troubled began every one to say: Is it
I, Lord?

26:23. But he answering said: He that dippeth his hand with me in the
dish, he shall betray me.

26:24. The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him. But woe to
that man by whom the Son of man shall be betrayed. It were better for
him, if that man had not been born.

26:25. And Judas that betrayed him answering, said: Is it I, Rabbi? He
saith to him: Thou hast said it.

26:26. And whilst they were at supper, Jesus took bread and blessed and
broke and gave to his disciples and said: Take ye and eat.  This is my
body.

This is my body... He does not say, This is the figure of my body--but
This is my body. (2 Council of Nice, Act. 6.) Neither does he say in
this, or with this is my body; but absolutely, This is my body: which
plainly implies transubstantiation.

26:27. And taking the chalice, he gave thanks and gave to them, saying:
Drink ye all of this.

Drink ye all of this... This was spoken to the twelve apostles; who were
the all then present; and they all drank of it, says St. Mark 14. 23.
But it no ways follows from these words spoken to the apostles, that all
the faithful are here commanded to drink of the chalice; any more than
that all the faithful are commanded to consecrate, offer and administer
this sacrament; because Christ upon this same occasion, and at the same
time, bid the apostles do so; in these words, St. Luke 22. 19, Do this
for a commemoration of me.

26:28. For this is my blood of the new testament, which shall be shed
for many unto remission of sins.

Blood of the new testament... As the old testament was dedicated with
the blood of victims, by Moses, in these words: This is the blood of the
testament, etc., Heb. 9. 20; so here is the dedication and institution
of the new testament, in the blood of Christ, here mystically shed by
these words: This is the blood of the new testament, etc.

26:29. And I say to you, I will not drink from henceforth of this fruit
of the vine until that day when I shall drink it with you new in the
kingdom of my Father.

Fruit of the vine... These words, by the account of St. Luke 26:22. 18,
were not spoken of the sacramental cup, but of the wine that was drunk
with the paschal lamb. Though the sacramental cup might also be called
the fruit of the vine, because it was consecrated from wine, and retains
the likeness, and all the accidents or qualities of wine.

26:30. And a hymn being said, they went out unto mount Olivet.

26:31. Then Jesus saith to them: All you shall be scandalized in me this
night. For it is written: I will strike the shepherd: and the sheep of
the flock shall be dispersed.

Scandalized in me, etc... Forasmuch as my being apprehended shall make
you all run away and forsake me.

26:32. But after I shall be risen again, I will go before you into
Galilee.

26:33. And Peter answering, said to him: Although all shall be
scandalized in thee, I will never be scandalized.

26:34. Jesus said to him: Amen I say to thee that in this night before
the cock crow, thou wilt deny me thrice.

26:35. Peter saith to him: Yea, though I should die with thee, I will
not deny thee. And in like manner said all the disciples.

26:36. Then Jesus came with them into a country place which is called
Gethsemani. And he said to his disciples: Sit you here, till I go yonder
and pray.

26:37. And taking with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began
to grow sorrowful and to be sad.

26:38. Then he saith to them: My soul is sorrowful even unto death. Stay
you here and watch with me.

26:39. And going a little further, he fell upon his face, praying and
saying: My Father, if it be possible, let this chalice pass from me.
Nevertheless, not as I will but as thou wilt.

26:40. And he cometh to his disciples and findeth them asleep. And he
saith to Peter: What? Could you not watch one hour with me?

26:41. Watch ye: and pray that ye enter not into temptation. The spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

26:42. Again the second time, he went and prayed, saying: My Father, if
this chalice may not pass away, but I must drink it, thy will be done.

26:43. And he cometh again and findeth them sleeping: for their eyes
were heavy.

26:44. And leaving them, he went again: and he prayed the third time,
saying the selfsame word.

26:45. Then he cometh to his disciples and said to them: Sleep ye now
and take your rest. Behold the hour is at hand: and the Son of man shall
be betrayed into the hands of sinners.

26:46. Rise: let us go. Behold he is at hand that will betray me.

26:47. As he yet spoke, behold Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with
him a great multitude with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests
and the ancients of the people.

26:48. And he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying: Whomsoever I
shall kiss, that is he. Hold him fast.

26:49. And forthwith coming to Jesus, he said: Hail, Rabbi. And he
kissed him.

26:50. And Jesus said to him: Friend, whereto art thou come? Then they
came up and laid hands on Jesus and held him.

26:51. And behold one of them that were with Jesus, stretching forth his
hand, drew out his sword: and striking the servant of the high priest,
cut off his ear.

26:52. Then Jesus saith to him: Put up again thy sword into its place:
for all that take the sword shall perish with the sword.

26:53. Thinkest thou that I cannot ask my Father, and he will give me
presently more than twelve legions of angels?

26:54. How then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that so it must be
done?

26:55. In that same hour, Jesus said to the multitudes: You are come
out, as it were to a robber, with swords and clubs to apprehend me. I
sat daily with you, teaching in the temple: and you laid not hands on
me.

26:56. Now all this was done that the scriptures of the prophets might
be fulfilled. Then the disciples, all leaving him, fled.

26:57. But they holding Jesus led him to Caiphas the high priest, where
the scribes and the ancients were assembled.

26:58. And Peter followed him afar off, even to the court of the high
priest, And going in, he sat with the servants, that he might see the
end.

26:59. And the chief priests and the whole council sought false witness
against Jesus, that they might put him to death.

26:60. And they found not, whereas many false witnesses had come in. And
last of all there came two false witnesses:

26:61. And they said: This man said, I am able to destroy the temple of
God and after three days to rebuild it.

26:62. And the high priest rising up, said to him: Answerest thou
nothing to the things which these witness against thee?

26:63. But Jesus held his peace. And the high priest said to him: I
adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us if thou be the Christ
the Son of God.

26:64. Jesus saith to him: Thou hast said it. Nevertheless I say to you,
hereafter you shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of the
power of God and coming in the clouds of heaven.

26:65. Then the high priest rent his garments, saying: He hath
blasphemed: What further need have we of witnesses? Behold, now you have
heard the blasphemy.

26:66. What think you? But they answering, said: He is guilty of death.

26:67. Then did they spit in his face and buffeted him. And others
struck his face with the palms of their hands,

26:68. Saying: Prophesy unto us, O Christ. Who is he that struck thee?

26:69. But Peter sat without in the court. And there came to him a
servant maid, saying: Thou also wast with Jesus the Galilean.

26:70. But he denied before them all, saying: I know not what thou
sayest.

26:71. And as he went out of the gate, another maid saw him; and she
saith to them that were there: This man also was with Jesus of Nazareth.

26:72. And again he denied with an oath: I know not the man.

26:73. And after a little while, they came that stood by and said to
Peter: Surely thou also art one of them. For even thy speech doth
discover thee.

26:74. Then he began to curse and to swear that he knew not the man. And
immediately the cock crew.

26:75. And Peter remembered the word of Jesus which he had said: Before
the cock crow, thou wilt deny me thrice. And going forth, he wept
bitterly.

Matthew Chapter 27

The continuation of the history of the passion of Christ. His death and
burial.

27:1. And when morning was come, all the chief priests and ancients of
the people took counsel against Jesus, that they might put him to death.

27:2. And they brought him bound and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the
governor.

27:3. Then Judas, who betrayed him, seeing that he was condemned,
repenting himself, brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief
priests and ancients,

27:4. Saying: I have sinned in betraying innocent blood. But they said:
What is that to us? Look thou to it.

27:5. And casting down the pieces of silver in the temple, he departed
and went and hanged himself with an halter.

27:6. But the chief priests having taken the pieces of silver, said: It
is not lawful to put them into the corbona, because it is the price of
blood.

Corbona... A place in the temple where the people put in their gifts or
offerings.

27:7. And after they had consulted together, they bought with them the
potter's field, to be a burying place for strangers.

27:8. For this cause that field was called Haceldama, that is, the field
of blood, even to this day.

27:9. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremias the prophet,
saying: And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that
was prized, whom they prized of the children of Israel.

27:10. And they gave them unto the potter's field, as the Lord appointed
to me.

27:11. And Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him,
saying: Art thou the king of the Jews? Jesus saith to him: Thou sayest
it.

27:12. And when he was accused by the chief priests and ancients, he
answered nothing.

27:13. Then Pilate saith to him: Dost not thou hear how great
testimonies they allege against thee?

27:14. And he answered him to never a word, so that the governor
wondered exceedingly.

27:15. Now upon the solemn day the governor was accustomed to release to
the people one prisoner, whom they would.

27:16. And he had then a notorious prisoner that was called Barabbas.

27:17. They therefore being gathered together, Pilate said: Whom will
you that I release to You: Barabbas, or Jesus that is called Christ?

27:18. For he knew that for envy they had delivered him.

27:19. And as he was sitting in the place of judgment, his wife sent to
him, saying: Have thou nothing to do with that just man; for I have
suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.

27:20. But the chief priests and ancients persuaded the people that they
should ask Barabbas and make Jesus away.

27:21. And the governor answering, said to them: Whether will you of the
two to be released unto you? But they said: Barabbas.

27:22. Pilate saith to them: What shall I do then with Jesus that is
called Christ? They say all: Let him be crucified.

27:23. The governor said to them: Why, what evil hath he done? But they
cried out the more, saying: Let him be crucified.

27:24. And Pilate seeing that he prevailed nothing, but that rather a
tumult was made, taking water washed his hands before the people,
saying: I am innocent of the blood of this just man. Look you to it.

27:25. And the whole people answering, said: His blood be upon us and
upon our children.

27:26. Then he released to them Barabbas: and having scourged Jesus,
delivered him unto them to be crucified.

27:27. Then the soldiers of the governor, taking Jesus into the hall,
gathered together unto him the whole band.

27:28. And stripping him, they put a scarlet cloak about him.

27:29. And platting a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a
reed in his right hand. And bowing the knee before him, they mocked him,
saying: Hail, King of the Jews.

27:30. And spitting upon him, they took the reed and struck his head.

27:31. And after they had mocked him, they took off the cloak from him
and put on him his own garments and led him away to crucify him.

27:32. And going out, they found a man of Cyrene, named Simon: him they
forced to take up his cross.

27:33. And they came to the place that is called Golgotha, which is the
place of Calvary.

27:34. And they gave him wine to drink mingled with gall. And when he
had tasted, he would not drink.

27:35. And after they had crucified him, they divided his garments,
casting lots; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
prophet, saying: They divided my garments among them; and upon my
vesture they cast lots.

27:36. And they sat and watched him.

27:37. And they put over his head his cause written: THIS IS JESUS THE
KING OF THE JEWS.

27:38. Then were crucified with him two thieves: one on the right hand
and one on the left.

27:39. And they that passed by blasphemed him, wagging their heads,

27:40. And saying: Vah, thou that destroyest the temple of God and in
three days dost rebuild it: save thy own self. If thou be the Son of
God, come down from the cross.

27:41. In like manner also the chief priests, with the scribes and
ancients, mocking said:

27:42. He saved others: himself he cannot save. If he be the king of
Israel, let him now come down from the cross: and we will believe him.

27:43. He trusted in God: let him now deliver him if he will have him.
For he said: I am the Son of God.

27:44. And the selfsame thing the thieves also that were crucified with
him reproached him with.

27:45. Now from the sixth hour, there was darkness over the whole earth,
until the ninth hour.

27:46. And about the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying:
Eli, Eli, lamma sabacthani? That is, My God, My God, why hast thou
forsaken me?

27:47. And some that stood there and heard said: This man calleth Elias.

27:48. And immediately one of them running took a sponge and filled it
with vinegar and put it on a reed and gave him to drink.

27:49. And the others said: Let be. Let us see whether Elias will come
to deliver him.

27:50. And Jesus again crying with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost.

27:51. And behold the veil of the temple was rent in two from the top
even to the bottom: and the earth quaked and the rocks were rent.

27:52. And the graves were opened: and many bodies of the saints that
had slept arose,

27:53. And coming out of the tombs after his resurrection, came into the
holy city and appeared to many.

27:54. Now the centurion and they that were with him watching Jesus,
having seen the earthquake and the things that were done, were sore
afraid, saying: Indeed this was the Son of God.

27:55. And there were there many women afar off, who had followed Jesus
from Galilee, ministering unto him:

27:56. Among whom was Mary Magdalen and Mary the mother of James and
Joseph and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.

27:57. And when it was evening, there came a certain rich man of
Arimathea, named Joseph, who also himself was a disciple of Jesus.

27:58. He went to Pilate and asked the body of Jesus. Then Pilate
commanded that the body should be delivered.

27:59. And Joseph taking the body wrapped it up in a clean linen cloth:

27:60. And laid it in his own new monument, which he had hewed out in a
rock. And he rolled a great stone to the door of the monument and went
his way.

27:61. And there was there Mary Magdalen and the other Mary, sitting
over against the sepulchre.

27:62. And the next day, which followed the day of preparation, the
chief priests and the Pharisees came together to Pilate,

The day of preparation... The eve of the sabbath; so called, because on
that day they prepared all things necessary; not being allowed so much
as to dress their meat on the sabbath day.

27:63. Saying: Sir, we have remembered, that that seducer said, while he
was yet alive: After three days I will rise again.

27:64. Command therefore the sepulchre to be guarded until the third
day: lest perhaps his disciples come and steal him away and say to the
people: He is risen from the dead. And the last error shall be worse
than the first.

27:65. Pilate saith to them: You have a guard. Go, guard it as you know.

27:66. And they departing, made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone
and setting guards.

Matthew Chapter 28

The resurrection of Christ. His commission to his disciples.

28:1. And in the end of the sabbath, when it began to dawn towards the
first day of the week, came Mary Magdalen and the other Mary, to see the
sepulchre.

28:2. And behold there was a great earthquake. For an angel of the Lord
descended from heaven and coming rolled back the stone and sat upon it.

28:3. And his countenance was as lightning and his raiment as snow.

28:4. And for fear of him, the guards were struck with terror and became
as dead men.

28:5. And the angel answering, said to the women: Fear not you: for I
know that you seek Jesus who was crucified.

28:6. He is not here. For he is risen, as he said. Come, and see the
place where the Lord was laid.

28:7. And going quickly, tell ye his disciples that he is risen.  And
behold he will go before you into Galilee. There you shall see him. Lo,
I have foretold it to you.

28:8. And they went out quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great
joy, running to tell his disciples.

28:9. And behold, Jesus met them, saying: All hail. But they came up and
took hold of his feet and adored him.

28:10. Then Jesus said to them: Fear not. Go, tell my brethren that they
go into Galilee. There they shall see me.

28:11. Who when they were departed, behold, some of the guards came into
the city and told the chief priests all things that had been done.

28:12. And they being assembled together with the ancients, taking
counsel, gave a great sum of money to the soldiers,

28:13. Saying: Say you, His disciples came by night and stole him away
when we were asleep.

28:14. And if the governor shall hear of this, we will persuade him and
secure you.

28:15. So they taking the money, did as they were taught: and this word
was spread abroad among the Jews even unto this day.

28:16. And the eleven disciples went into Galilee, unto the mountain
where Jesus had appointed them.

28:17. And seeing him they adored: but some doubted.

28:18. And Jesus coming, spoke to them, saying: All power is given to me
in heaven and in earth.

All power, etc... See here the warrant and commission of the apostles
and their successors, the bishops and pastors of Christ's church. He
received from his Father all power in heaven and in earth: and in virtue
of this power, he sends them (even as his Father sent him, St. John 20.
21) to teach and disciple, not one, but all nations; and instruct them
in all truths: and that he may assist them effectually in the execution
of this commission, he promises to be with them, not for three or four
hundred years only, but all days, even to the consummation of the world.
How then could the Catholic Church ever go astray; having always with
her pastors, as is here promised, Christ himself, who is the way, the
truth, and the life. St. John 14.

28:19. Going therefore, teach ye all nations: baptizing them in the name
of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.

28:20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you. And behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the
world.






THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO ST. MARK

St. Mark, the disciple and interpreter of St. Peter (saith St. Jerome),
according to what he heard from Peter himself, wrote at Rome a brief
Gospel at the request of the Brethren, about ten years after our lord's
Ascension; which when Peter had heard, he approved of it and with his
authority published it to the church to be read. Baronius and others say
that the original was written in Latin: but the more general opinion is
that the Evangelist wrote it in Greek.


Mark Chapter 1

The preaching of John the Baptist. Christ is baptized by him. He calls
his disciples and works many miracles.

1:1. The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.

1:2. As it is written in Isaias the prophet: Behold I send my angel
before thy face, who shall prepare the way before thee.

1:3. A voice of one crying in the desert: Prepare ye the way of the
Lord; make straight his paths.

1:4. John was in the desert, baptizing and preaching the baptism of
penance, unto remission of sins.

1:5. And there went out to him all the country of Judea and all they of
Jerusalem and were baptized by him in the river of Jordan, confessing
their sins.

1:6. And John was clothed camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his
loins: and he ate locusts and wild honey.

1:7. And he preached, saying: There cometh after me one mightier than I,
the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and loose.

1:8. I have baptized you with water: but he shall baptize you with the
Holy Ghost.

1:9. And it came to pass, in those days, Jesus came from Nazareth of
Galilee and was baptized by John in Jordan.

1:10. And forthwith coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens open
and the Spirit as a dove descending and remaining on him.

1:11. And there came a voice from heaven: Thou art my beloved Son; in
thee I am well pleased.

1:12. And immediately the Spirit drove him out into the desert.

1:13. And he was in the desert forty days and forty nights, and was
tempted by Satan. And he was with beasts: and the angels ministered to
him.

1:14. And after that John was delivered up, Jesus came in Galilee,
preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God,

1:15. And saying: The time is accomplished and the kingdom of God is at
hand. Repent and believe the gospel:

1:16. And passing by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew his
brother, casting nets into the sea for they were fishermen.

1:17. And Jesus said to them: Come after me; and I will make you to
become fishers of men.

1:18. And immediately leaving their nets, they followed him.

1:19. And going on from thence a little farther, he saw James the son of
Zebedee and John his brother, who also were mending their nets in the
ship:

1:20. And forthwith he called them. And leaving their father Zebedee in
the ship with his hired men, they followed him.

1:21. And they entered into Capharnaum: and forthwith upon the sabbath
days going into the synagogue, he taught them.

1:22. And they were astonished at his doctrine. For he was teaching them
as one having power, and not as the scribes.

1:23. And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and
he cried out,

1:24. Saying: What have we to do with thee, Jesus of Nazareth?  Art thou
come to destroy us? I know who thou art, the Holy One of God.

1:25. And Jesus threatened him, saying: Speak no more, and go out of the
man.

1:26. And the unclean spirit, tearing him and crying out with a loud
voice, went out of him.

1:27. And they were all amazed insomuch that they questioned among
themselves, saying: What thing is this? What is this new doctrine? For
with power he commandeth even the unclean spirits: and they obey him.

1:28. And the fame of him was spread forthwith into all the country of
Galilee.

1:29. And immediately going out of the synagogue they came into the
house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.

1:30. And Simon's wife's mother lay in a fit of a fever: and forthwith
they tell him of her.

1:31. And coming to her, he lifted her up, taking her by the hand; and
immediately the fever left her, and she ministered unto them.

1:32. And when it was evening, after sunset, they brought to him all
that were ill and that were possessed with devils.

1:33. And all the city was gathered together at the door.

1:34. And he healed many that were troubled with divers diseases.  And
he cast out many devils: and he suffered them not to speak, because they
knew him.

1:35. And rising very early, going out, he went into a desert place: and
there he prayed.

1:36. And Simon and they that were with him followed after him.

1:37. And when they had found him, they said to him: All seek for thee.

1:38. And he saith to them: Let us go into the neighbouring towns and
cities, that I may preach there also; for to this purpose am I come.

1:39. And he was preaching in their synagogues and in all Galilee and
casting out devils.

1:40. And there came a leper to him, beseeching him and kneeling down,
said to him: If thou wilt thou canst make me clean.

1:41. And Jesus, having compassion on him, stretched forth his hand and
touching him saith to him: I will. Be thou made clean.

1:42. And when he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from him:
and he was made clean.

1:43. And he strictly charged him and forthwith sent him away.

1:44. And he saith to him: See thou tell no one; but go, shew thyself to
the high priest and offer for thy cleansing the things that Moses
commanded, for a testimony to them.

1:45. But he being gone out, began to publish and to blaze abroad the
word: so that he could not openly go into the city, but was without in
desert places. And they flocked to him from all sides.

Mark Chapter 2

Christ heals the sick of the palsy. He calls Matthew and excuses his
disciples.

2:1. And again he entered into Capharnaum after some days.

2:2. And it was heard that he was in the house. And many came together,
so that there was no room: no, not even at the door.  And he spoke to
them the word.

2:3. And they came to him, bringing one sick of the palsy, who was
carried by four.

2:4. And when they could not offer him unto him for the multitude, they
uncovered the roof where he was: and opening it, they let down the bed
wherein the man sick of the palsy lay.

2:5. And when Jesus had seen their faith, he saith to the sick of the
palsy: Son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

2:6. And there were some of the scribes sitting there and thinking in
their hearts:

2:7. Why doth this man speak thus? He blasphemeth. Who can forgive sins,
but God only?

2:8. Which Jesus presently knowing in his spirit that they so thought
within themselves, saith to them: Why think you these things in your
hearts?

2:9. Which is easier, to say to the sick of the palsy: Thy sins are
forgiven thee; or to say: Arise, take up thy bed and walk?

2:10. But that you may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to
forgive sins (he saith to the sick of the palsy):

2:11. I say to thee: Arise. Take up thy bed and go into thy house.

2:12. And immediately he arose and, taking up his bed, went his way in
the sight of all: so that all wondered and glorified God, saying: We
never saw the like.

2:13. And he went forth again to the sea side: and all the multitude
came to him. And he taught them.

2:14. And when he was passing by, he saw Levi, the son of Alpheus,
sitting at the receipt of custom; and he saith to him: Follow me. And
rising up, he followed him.

2:15. And it came to pass as he sat at meat in his house, many Publicans
and sinners sat down together with Jesus and his disciples. For they,
with Jesus who also followed him. For they were many, who also followed
him.

2:16. And the scribes and the Pharisees, seeing that he ate with
publicans and sinners, said to his disciples: Why doth your master eat
and drink with publicans and sinners?

2:17. Jesus hearing this, saith to them: They that are well have no need
of a physician, but they that are sick. For I came not to call the just,
but sinners.

2:18. And the disciples of John and the Pharisees used to fast.  And
they come and say to him: Why do the disciples of John and of the
Pharisees fast; but thy disciples do not fast?

2:19. And Jesus saith to them: Can the children of the marriage fast, as
long as the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the bridegroom
with them, they cannot fast.

2:20. But the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them: and then they shall fast in those days.

2:21. No man seweth a piece of raw cloth to an old garment: otherwise
the new piecing taketh away from the old, and there is made a greater
rent.

2:22. And no man putteth new wine into old bottles: otherwise the wine
will burst the bottles, and both the wine will be spilled and the
bottles will be lost. But new wine must be put into new bottles.

2:23. And it came to pass again, as the Lord walked through the corn
fields on the sabbath, that his disciples began to go forward and to
pluck the ears of corn.

2:24. And the Pharisees said to him: Behold, why do they on the sabbath
day that which is not lawful?

2:25. And he said to them: Have you never read what David did when he
had need and was hungry, himself and they that were with him?

2:26. How he went into the house of God, under Abiathar the high priest,
and did eat the loaves of proposition, which was not lawful to eat but
for the priests, and gave to them who were with him?

2:27. And he said to them: The sabbath was made for man, and not man for
the sabbath.

2:28. Therefore the Son of man is Lord of the sabbath also.

Mark Chapter 3

Christ heals the withered hand. He chooses the twelve. He confutes the
blasphemy of the Pharisees.

3:1. And he entered again into the synagogue: and there was a man there
who had a withered hand.

3:2. And they watched him whether he would heal on the sabbath days,
that they might accuse him.

3:3. And he said to the man who had the withered hand: Stand up in the
midst.

3:4. And he saith to them: Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days,
or to do evil? To save life, or to destroy? But they held their peace.

3:5. And looking round about on them with anger, being grieved for the
blindness of their hearts, he saith to the man: Stretch forth thy hand.
And he stretched it forth: and his hand was restored unto him.

3:6. And the Pharisees going out, immediately made a consultation with
the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.

3:7. But Jesus retired with his disciples to the sea; and a great
multitude followed him from Galilee and Judea,

3:8. And from Jerusalem, and from Idumea and from beyond the Jordan. And
they about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, hearing the things which
he did, came to him.

3:9. And he spoke to his disciples that a small ship should wait on him,
because of the multitude, lest they should throng him.

3:10. For he healed many, so that they pressed upon him for to touch
him, as many as had evils.

3:11. And the unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him:
and they cried, saying:

3:12. Thou art the Son of God. And he strictly charged them that they
should not make him known.

3:13. And going up into a mountain, he called unto him whom he would
himself: and they came to him.

3:14. And he made that twelve should be with him, and that he might send
them to preach.

3:15. And he gave them power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils.

3:16. And to Simon he gave the name Peter:

3:17. And James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and
he named them Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder.

3:18. And Andrew and Philip, and Bartholomew and Matthew, and Thomas and
James of Alpheus, and Thaddeus and Simon the Cananean:

3:19. And Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.

3:20. And they come to a house, and the multitude cometh together again,
so that they could not so much as eat bread.

3:21. And when his friends had heard of it, they went out to lay hold on
him. For they said: He is become mad.

3:22. And the scribes who were come down from Jerusalem, said: He hath
Beelzebub, and by the prince of devils he casteth out devils.

3:23. And after he had called them together, he said to them in
parables: How can Satan cast out Satan?

3:24. And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom cannot
stand.

3:25. And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand.

3:26. And if Satan be risen up against himself, he is divided, and
cannot stand, but hath an end.

3:27. No man can enter into the house of a strong man and rob him of his
goods, unless he first bind the strong man, and then shall he plunder
his house.

3:28. Amen I say to you that all sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of
men, and the blasphemies wherewith they shall blaspheme:

3:29. But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, shall never
have forgiveness, but shall be guilty of an everlasting sin.

3:30. Because they said: He hath an unclean spirit.

3:31. And his mother and his brethren came; and standing without, sent
unto him, calling him.

3:32. And the multitude sat about him; and they say to him: Behold thy
mother and thy brethren without seek for thee.

3:33. And answering them, he said: Who is my mother and my brethren?

3:34. And looking round about on them who sat about him, he saith:
Behold my mother and my brethren.

3:35. For whosoever shall do the will of God, he is my brother, and my
sister, and mother.

Mark Chapter 4

The parable of the sower. Christ stills the tempest at sea.

4:1. And again he began to teach by the sea side; and a great multitude
was gathered together unto him, so that he went up into a ship and sat
in the sea: and all the multitude was upon the land by the sea side.

4:2. And he taught them many things in parables, and said unto them in
his doctrine:

4:3. Hear ye: Behold, the sower went out to sow.

4:4. And whilst he sowed, some fell by the way side, and the birds of
the air came and ate it up.

4:5. And other some fell upon stony ground, where it had not much earth;
and it shot up immediately, because it had no depth of earth.

4:6. And when the sun was risen, it was scorched; and because it had no
root, it withered away.

4:7. And some fell among thorns; and the thorns grew up, and choked it,
and it yielded no fruit.

4:8. And some fell upon good ground; and brought forth fruit that grew
up, and increased and yielded, one thirty, another sixty, and another a
hundred.

4:9. And he said: He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

4:10. And when he was alone, the twelve that were with him asked him the
parable.

4:11. And he said to them: To you it is given to know the mystery of the
kingdom of God: but to them that are without, all things are done in
parables:

4:12. That seeing they may see, and not perceive; and hearing they may
hear, and not understand; lest at any time they should be converted, and
their sins should be forgiven them.

That seeing they may see, etc... in punishment of their wilfully
shutting their eyes, (St. Matt. 13. 15,) God justly withdrew those
lights and graces, which otherwise he would have given them, for their
effectual conversion.

4:13. And he saith to them: Are you ignorant of this, parable?  and how
shall you know all parables?

4:14. He that soweth, soweth the word.

4:15. And these are they by the way side, where the word is sown, and as
soon as they have heard, immediately Satan cometh and taketh away the
word that was sown in their hearts.

4:16. And these likewise are they that are sown on the stony ground: who
when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with joy.

4:17. And they have no root in themselves, but are only for a time: and
then when tribulation and persecution ariseth for the word they are
presently scandalized.

4:18. And others there are who are sown among thorns: these are they
that hear the word,

4:19. And the cares of the world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and
the lusts after other things entering in choke the word, and it is made
fruitless.

4:20. And these are they who are sown upon the good ground, who hear the
word, and receive it, and yield fruit, the one thirty, another sixty,
and another a hundred.

4:21. And he said to them: Doth a candle come in to be put under a
bushel, or under a bed? and not to be set on a candlestick?

4:22. For there is nothing hid, which shall not be made manifest:
neither was it made secret, but that it may come abroad.

4:23. If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.

4:24. And he said to them: Take heed what you hear. In what measure you
shall mete, it shall be measured to you again, and more shall be given
to you.

4:25. For he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not,
that also which he hath shall be taken away from him.

4:26. And he said: So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast
seed into the earth,

4:27. And should sleep, and rise, night and day, and the seed should
spring, and grow up whilst he knoweth not.

4:28. For the earth of itself bringeth forth fruit, first the blade,
then the ear, afterwards the full corn in the ear.

4:29. And when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he putteth in the
sickle, because the harvest is come.

4:30. And he said: To what shall we liken the kingdom of God? or to what
parable shall we compare it?

4:31. It is as a grain of mustard seed: which when it is sown in the
earth, is less than all the seeds that are in the earth:

4:32. And when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than all
herbs, and shooteth out great branches, so that the birds of the air may
dwell under the shadow thereof.

4:33. And with many such parables, he spoke to them the word, according
as they were able to hear.

4:34. And without parable he did not speak unto them; but apart, he
explained all things to his disciples.

4:35. And he saith to them that day, when evening was come: Let us pass
over to the other side.

4:36. And sending away the multitude, they take him even as he was in
the ship: and there were other ships with him.

4:37. And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into the
ship, so that the ship was filled.

4:38. And he was in the hinder part of the ship, sleeping upon a pillow;
and they awake him, and say to him: Master, doth, it not concern thee
that we perish?

4:39. And rising up, he rebuked the wind, and said to the sea: Peace, be
still. And the wind ceased: and there was made a great calm.

4:40. And he said to them: Why are you fearful? have you not faith yet?
And they feared exceedingly: and they said one to another: Who is this
(thinkest thou) that both wind and sea obey him?

Mark Chapter 5

Christ casts out a legion of devils: he heals the issue of blood, and
raises the daughter of Jairus to life.

5:1. And they came over the strait of the sea, into the country of the
Gerasens.

5:2. And as he went out of the ship, immediately there met him out of
the monuments a man with an unclean spirit,

5:3. Who had his dwelling in the tombs, and no man now could bind him,
not even with chains.

5:4. For having been often bound with fetters and chains, he had burst
the chains, and broken the fetters in pieces, and no one could tame him.

5:5. And he was always day and night in the monuments and in the
mountains, crying and cutting himself with stones.

5:6. And seeing Jesus afar off, he ran and adored him.

5:7. And crying with a loud voice, he said: What have I to do with thee,
Jesus the Son of the most high God? I adjure thee by God that thou
torment me not.

5:8. For he said unto him: Go out of the man, thou unclean spirit.

5:9. And he asked him: What is thy name? And he saith to him: My name is
Legion, for we are many.

5:10. And he besought him much, that he would not drive him away out of
the country.

5:11. And there was there near the mountain a great herd of swine,
feeding.

5:12. And the spirits besought him, saying: Send us into the swine, that
we may enter into them.

5:13. And Jesus immediately gave them leave. And the unclean spirits
going out, entered into the swine: and the herd with great violence was
carried headlong into the sea, being about two thousand, were stifled in
the sea.

5:14. And they that fed them fled, and told it in the city and in the
fields. And they went out to see what was done:

5:15. And they came to Jesus, and they see him that was troubled with
the devil, sitting, clothed, and well in his wits, and they were afraid.

5:16. And they that had seen it, told them, in what manner he had been
dealt with who had the devil; and concerning the swine.

5:17. And they began to pray him that he would depart from their coasts.

5:18. And when he went up into the ship, he that had been troubled with
the devil, began to beseech him that he might be with him.

5:19. And he admitted him not, but saith him: Go into thy house to thy
friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee, and
hath had mercy thee.

5:20. And he went his way, and began to publish in Decapolis how great
things Jesus had done for him: and all men wondered.

5:21. And when Jesus had passed again in the ship over the strait, a
great multitude assembled together unto him, and he was nigh unto the
sea.

5:22. And there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue named Jairus:
and seeing him, falleth down at his feet.

5:23. And he besought him much, saying: My daughter is at the point of
death, come, lay thy hand upon her, that she may be safe, and may live.

5:24. And he went with him, and a great multitude followed him, and they
thronged him.

5:25. And a woman who was under an issue of blood twelve years,

5:26. And had suffered many things from many physicians; and had spent
all that she had, and was nothing the better, but rather worse,

5:27. When she had heard of Jesus, came in the crowd behind him, and
touched his garment.

5:28. For she said: If I shall touch but his garment, I shall be whole.

5:29. And forthwith the fountain of her blood was dried up, and she felt
in her body that she was healed of the evil.

5:30. And immediately Jesus knowing in himself the virtue that had
proceeded from him, turning to the multitude, said: Who hath touched my
garments?

5:31. And his disciples said to him: Thou seest the multitude thronging
thee, and sayest thou who hath touched me?

5:32. And he looked about to see her who had done this.

5:33. But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her,
came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.

5:34. And he said to her: Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole: go
in peace, and be thou whole of thy disease.

5:35. While he was yet speaking, some come from the ruler of the
synagogue's house, saying: Thy daughter is dead: why dost thou trouble
the master any further?

5:36. But Jesus having heard the word that was spoken, saith to the
ruler of the synagogue: Fear not, only believe.

5:37. And he admitted not any man to follow him, but Peter, and James,
and John the brother of James.

5:38. And they cone to the house of the ruler of the synagogue; and he
seeth a tumult, and people weeping and wailing much.

5:39. And going in, he saith to them Why make you this ado, and weep?
the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth.

5:40. And they laughed him to scorn. But he having put them all out,
taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were with
him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying.

5:41. And taking the damsel by the hand, he saith to her: Talitha cumi,
which is, being interpreted: Damsel (I say to thee) arise.

5:42. And immediately the damsel rose up, and walked: and she was twelve
years old: and they were astonished with a great astonishment.

5:43. And he charged them strictly that no man should know it: and
commanded that something should be given her to eat.

Mark Chapter 6

Christ teaches at Nazareth: he sends forth the twelve apostles: he feeds
five thousand with five loaves; and walks upon the sea.

6:1. And going out from thence, he went into his own country; and his
disciples followed him.

6:2. And when the Sabbath was come, he began to teach in the synagogue:
and many hearing him were in admiration at his doctrine, saying: How
came this man by all these things? and what wisdom is this that is given
to him, and such mighty works as are wrought by his hands?

6:3. Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James,
and Joseph, and Jude, and Simon? are not also his sisters here with us?
And they were scandalized in regard of him.

6:4. And Jesus said to them: A prophet is not without honour, but in his
own country, and in his own house, and among his own kindred.

6:5. And he could not do any miracles there, only that he cured a few
that were sick, laying his hands upon them.

He could not... Not for want of power, but because he would not work
miracles in favour of obstinate and incredulous people, who were
unworthy of such favours.

6:6. And he wondered because of their unbelief, and he went through the
villages round about teaching.

6:7. And he called the twelve; and began to send them two and two, and
gave them power over unclean spirits.

6:8. And he commanded them that they should take nothing for the way,
but a staff only; no scrip, no bread, nor money in their purse,

6:9. But to be shod with sandals, and that they should not put on two
coats.

6:10. And he said to them: Wheresoever you shall enter into an house,
there abide till you depart from that place.

6:11. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you; going forth
from thence, shake off the dust from your feet for a testimony to them.

6:12. And going forth they preached men should do penance:

6:13. And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that
were sick, and healed them.

6:14. And king Herod heard, (for his name was made manifest,) and he
said: John the Baptist is risen again from dead, and therefore mighty
works shew forth themselves in him.

6:15. And others said: It is Elias. But others said: It is a prophet, as
one of the prophets.

6:16. Which Herod hearing, said: John whom I beheaded, he is risen again
from the dead.

6:17. For Herod himself had sent and apprehended John, and bound him
prison for the sake of Herodias the wife of Philip his brother, because
he had married her.

6:18. For John said to Herod: It is not lawful for thee to have thy
brother's wife.

6:19. Now Herodias laid snares for him: and was desirous to put him to
death and could not.

6:20. For Herod feared John, knowing him to be a just and holy man: and
kept him, and when he heard him, did many things: and he heard him
willingly.

And kept him... That is, from the designs of Herodias; and for fear of
the people, would not put him to death, though she sought it; and
through her daughter she effected her wish.

6:21. And when a convenient day was come, Herod made a supper for his
birthday, for the princes, and tribunes, and chief men of Galilee.

6:22. And when the daughter of the same Herodias had come in, and had
danced, and pleased Herod, and them that were at table with him, the
king said to the damsel: Ask of me what thou wilt, and I will give it
thee.

6:23. And he swore to her: Whatsoever thou shalt ask I will give thee,
though it be the half of my kingdom.

6:24. Who when she was gone out, said to her mother, What shall I ask?
But her mother said: The head of John the Baptist.

6:25. And when she was come in immediately with haste to the king, she
asked, saying: I will that forthwith thou give me in a dish, the head of
John the Baptist.

6:26. And the king was struck sad. Yet because of his oath, and because
of them that were with him at table, he would not displease her:

6:27. But sending an executioner, he commanded that his head should be
brought in a dish.

6:28. And he beheaded him in the prison, and brought his head in a dish:
and gave to the damsel, and the damsel gave it her mother.

6:29. Which his disciples hearing came, and took his body, and laid it
in a tomb.

6:30. And the apostles coming together unto Jesus, related to him all
things that they had done and taught.

6:31. And he said to them: Come apart into a desert place, and rest a
little. For there were many coming and going: and they had not so much
as time to eat.

6:32. And going up into a ship, they went into a desert place apart.

6:33. And they saw them going away, and many knew: and they ran flocking
thither foot from all the cities, and were there before them.

6:34. And Jesus going out saw a great multitude: and he had compassion
on them, because they were as sheep not having a shepherd, and he began
to teach them many things.

6:35. And when the day was now far spent, his disciples came to him,
saying: This is a desert place, and the hour is now past:

6:36. Send them away, that going into the next villages and towns, they
may buy themselves meat to eat.

6:37. And he answering said to them: Give you them to eat. And they said
to him: Let us go and buy bread for two hundred pence, and we will give
them to eat.

6:38. And he saith to them: How many loaves have you? go and see.  And
when they knew, they say: Five, and two fishes.

6:39. And he commanded them that they should make them all sit down by
companies upon the green grass.

6:40. And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds and by fifties.

6:41. And when he had taken the five loaves, and the two fishes: looking
up to heaven, he blessed, and broke the loaves, and gave to his
disciples to set before them: and the two fishes he divided among them
all.

6:42. And they all did eat, and had their fill.

6:43. And they took up the leavings, twelve full baskets of fragments,
and of the fishes.

6:44. And they that did eat, were five thousand men.

6:45. And immediately he obliged his disciples to go up into the ship,
that they might go before him over the water to Bethsaida, whilst he
dismissed the people.

6:46. And when he had dismissed them, he went up to the mountain to
pray,

6:47. And when it was late, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and
himself alone on the land.

6:48. And seeing them labouring in rowing, (for the wind was against
them,) and about the fourth watch of the night, he cometh to them
walking upon the sea, and he would have passed by them.

6:49. But they seeing him walking upon the sea, thought it was an
apparition, and they cried out.

6:50. For they all saw him, and were troubled. And immediately he
spoke with them, and said to them: Have a good heart, it is I, fear ye
not.

6:51. And he went up to them into the ship, and the wind ceased: and
they were far more astonished within themselves:

6:52. For they understood not concerning the loaves; for their heart was
blinded.

6:53. And when they had passed over, they came into the land of
Genezareth, and set to the shore.

6:54. And when they were gone out of the ship, immediately they knew
him:

6:55. And running through that whole country, they began to carry about
in beds those that were sick, where they heard he was.

6:56. And whithersoever he entered, into towns or into villages or
cities, they laid the sick in the streets, and besought him that they
might touch but the hem of his garment: and as many as touched him were
made whole.

Mark Chapter 7

Christ rebukes the Pharisees. He heals the daughter of the woman of
Chanaan; and the man that was deaf and dumb.

7:1. And there assembled together unto him the Pharisees and some of the
scribes, coming from Jerusalem.

7:2. And when they had seen some of his disciples eat bread with common,
that is, with unwashed hands, they found fault.

7:3. For the Pharisees and all the Jews eat not without often washing
their hands, holding the tradition of the ancients.

7:4. And when they come from the market, unless they be washed, they eat
not: and many other things there are that have been delivered to them to
observe, the washings of cups and of pots and of brazen vessels and of
beds.

7:5. And the Pharisees and scribes asked him: Why do not thy disciples
walk according to the tradition of the ancients, but they eat bread with
common hands?

7:6. But he answering, said to them: Well did Isaias prophesy of you
hypocrites, as it is written: This people honoureth me with their lips,
but their heart is far from me.

7:7. And in vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines and precepts of
men.

Doctrines and precepts of men... See the annotations, Matt. 15. 9, 11.

7:8. For leaving the commandment of God, you hold the tradition of men,
the washing of pots and of cups: and many other things you do like to
these.

7:9. And he said to them: Well do you make void the commandment of God,
that you may keep your own tradition.

7:10. For Moses said: Honour thy father and thy mother. And He that
shall curse father or mother, dying let him die.

7:11. But you say: If a man shall say to his father or mother, Corban
(which is a gift) whatsoever is from me shall profit thee.

7:12. And further you suffer him not to do any thing for his father or
mother,

7:13. Making void the word of God by your own tradition, which you have
given forth. And many other such like things you do.

7:14. And calling again the multitude unto him, he said to them: Hear ye
me all and understand.

7:15. There is nothing from without a man that entering into him can
defile him. But the things which come from a man, those are they that
defile a man.

7:16. If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.

7:17. And when he was come into the house from the multitude, his
disciples asked him the parable.

7:18. And he saith to them: So are you also without knowledge?
Understand you not that every thing from without entering into a man
cannot defile him:

7:19. Because it entereth not into his heart but goeth into his belly
and goeth out into the privy, purging all meats?

7:20. But he said that the things which come out from a man, they defile
a man.

7:21. For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders,

7:22. Thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil
eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness.

7:23. All these evil things come from within and defile a man.

7:24. And rising from thence he went into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon:
and entering into a house, he would that no man should know it. And he
could not be hid.

7:25. For a woman as soon as she heard of him, whose daughter had an
unclean spirit, came in and fell down at his feet.

7:26. For the woman was a Gentile, a Syrophenician born. And she
besought him that he would cast forth the devil out of her daughter.

7:27. Who said to her: suffer first the children to be filled: for it is
not good to take the bread of the children and cast it to the dogs.

7:28. But she answered and said to him: Yea, Lord; for the whelps also
eat under the table of the crumbs of the children.

7:29. And he said to her: For this saying, go thy way. The devil is gone
out of thy daughter.

7:30. And when she was come into her house, she found the girl lying
upon the bed and that the devil was gone out.

7:31. And again going out of the coasts of Tyre, he came by Sidon to the
sea of Galilee, through the midst the of the coasts of Decapolis.

7:32. And they bring to him one deaf and dumb: and they besought him
that he would lay his hand upon him.

7:33. And taking him from the multitude apart, he put his fingers into
his ears: and spitting, he touched his tongue.

7:34. And looking up to heaven, he groaned and said to him: Ephpheta,
which is, Be thou opened.

7:35. And immediately his ears were opened and the string of his tongue
was loosed and he spoke right.

7:36. And he charged them that they should tell no man. But the more he
charged them, so much the more a great deal did they publish it.

7:37. And so much the more did they wonder, saying: He hath done all
things well. He hath made both the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak.

Mark Chapter 8

Christ feeds four thousand. He gives sight to a blind man. He foretells
his passion.

8:1. In those days again, when there was great multitude and they had
nothing to eat; calling his disciples together, he saith to them:

8:2. I have compassion on the multitude, for behold they have now been
with me three days and have nothing to eat.

8:3. And if I shall send them away fasting to their home, they will
faint in the way: for some of them came from afar off.

8:4. And his disciples answered him: From whence can any one fill them
here with bread in the wilderness?

8:5. And he asked them: How many loaves have ye? Who said: Seven.

8:6. And he commanded the people to sit down on the ground. And taking
the seven loaves, giving thanks, he broke and gave to his disciples for
to set before them. And they set them before the people.

8:7. And they had a few little fishes: and he blessed them and commanded
them to be set before them.

8:8. And they did eat and were filled: and they took up that which was
left of the fragments, seven baskets.

8:9. And they that had eaten were about four thousand. And he sent them
away.

8:10. And immediately going up into a ship with his disciples, he came
into the parts of Dalmanutha.

8:11. And the Pharisees came forth and began to question with him,
asking him a sign from heaven, tempting him.

8:12. And sighing deeply in spirit, he saith: Why doth this generation
seek a sign? Amen, I say to you, a sign shall not be given to this
generation.

8:13. And leaving them, he went up again into the ship and passed to the
other side of the water.

8:14. And they forgot to take bread: and they had but one loaf with them
in the ship.

8:15. And he charged them saying: Take heed and beware of the leaven of
the Pharisees and of the leaven of Herod.

8:16. And they reasoned among themselves, saying: Because we have no
bread.

8:17. Which Jesus knowing, saith to them: Why do you reason, because you
have no bread? Do you not yet know nor understand?  Have you still your
heart blinded?

8:18. Having eyes, see you not? And having ears, hear you not?  Neither
do you remember?

8:19. When I broke the five loves among five thousand, how many baskets
full of fragments took you up? They say to him: Twelve.

8:20. When also the seven loaves among four thousand, how many baskets
of fragments took you up? And they say to him: Seven.

8:21. And he said to them: How do you not yet understand?

8:22. And they came to Bethsaida: and they bring to him a blind man. And
they besought him that he would touch him.

8:23. And taking the blind man by the hand, he led him out of the town.
And spitting upon his eyes, laying his hands on him, he asked him if he
saw any thing.

8:24. And looking up, he said: I see men, as it were trees, walking.

8:25. After that again he laid his hands upon his eyes: and he began to
see and was restored, so that he saw all things clearly.

8:26. And he sent him into his house, saying: Go into thy house, and if
thou enter into the town, tell nobody.

8:27. And Jesus went out, and his disciples into the towns of Caesarea
Philippi. And in the way, he asked his disciples, saying to them: Whom
do men say that I am?

8:28. Who answered him, saying: John the Baptist; but some Elias, and
others as one of the prophets.

8:29. Then he saith to them: But whom do you say that I am? Peter
answering said to him: Thou art the Christ.

8:30. And he strictly charged them that they should not tell any man of
him.

8:31. And he began to teach them that the Son of man must suffer many
things and be rejected by the ancients and by the high priests and the
scribes: and be killed and after three days rise again.

8:32. And he spoke the word openly. And Peter taking him began to rebuke
him.

8:33. Who turning about and seeing his disciples, threatened Peter,
saying: Go behind me, Satan, because thou savourest not the things that
are of God but that are of men.

8:34. And calling the multitude together with his disciples, he said to
them: If any man will follow me, let him deny himself and take up his
cross and follow me.

8:35. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever
shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel shall save it.

8:36. For what shall it profit a man, if he gain the whole world and
suffer the loss of his soul?

8:37. Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul:

8:38. For he that shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in this
adulterous and sinful generation: the Son of man also will be ashamed of
him, when he shall come in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.

8:39. And he said to them: Amen f say to you that there are some of them
that stand here who shall not taste death till they see the kingdom of
God coming in power.

Mark Chapter 9

Christ is transfigured. He casts out the dumb spirit. He teaches
humility and to avoid scandal.

9:1. And after six days, Jesus taketh with him Peter and James and John,
and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves, and was
transfigured before them.

9:2. And his garments became shining and exceeding white as snow, so as
no fuller upon earth can make white.

9:3. And there appeared to them Elias with Moses: and they were talking
with Jesus.

9:4. And Peter answering, said to Jesus: Rabbi, it is good for us to be
here. And let us make three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias.

9:5. For he knew not what he said: for they were struck with fear.

9:6. And there was a cloud overshadowing them. And a voice came out of
the cloud, saying: This is my most beloved Son. Hear ye him.

9:7. And immediately looking about, they saw no man any more, but Jesus
only with them.

9:8. And as they came down from the mountain, he charged them not to
tell any man what things they had seen, till the Son of man shall be
risen again from the dead.

9:9. And they kept the word to themselves; questioning together what
that should mean, when he shall be risen from the dead.

9:10. And they asked him, saying: Why then do the Pharisees and scribes
say that Elias must come first?

9:11. Who answering, said to then: Elias, when he shall come first,
shall restore all things; and as it is written of the Son of man that he
must suffer many things and be despised.

9:12. But I say to you that Elias also is come (and they have done to
him whatsoever they would), as it is written of him.

9:13. And coming to his disciples he saw a great multitude about them
and the scribes disputing with them.

9:14. And presently all the people, seeing Jesus, were astonished and
struck with fear: and running to him, they saluted him.

9:15. And he asked them: What do you question about among you?

9:16. And one of the multitude, answering, said: Master, I have brought
my son to thee, having a dumb spirit.

9:17. Who, wheresoever he taketh him, dasheth him: and he foameth and
gnasheth with the teeth and pineth away. And I spoke to thy disciples to
cast him out: and they could not.

9:18. Who answering them, said: O incredulous generation, how long shall
I be with you? How long shall I suffer you? Bring him unto me.

9:19. And they brought him. And when he had seen him, immediately the
spirit troubled him and being thrown down upon the ground, he rolled
about foaming.

9:20. And he asked his father: How long time is it since this hath
happened unto him? But he sad: From his infancy.

9:21. And oftentimes hath he cast him into the fire and into the waters
to destroy him. But if thou canst do any thing, help us, having
compassion on us.

9:22. And Jesus saith to him: If thou canst believe, all things are
possible to him that believeth.

9:23. And immediately the father of the boy crying out, with tears said:
I do believe, Lord. Help my unbelief.

9:24. And when Jesus saw the multitude running together, he threatened
the unclean spirit, saying to him: Deaf and dumb spirit, I command thee,
go out of him and enter not any more into him.

9:25. And crying out and greatly tearing him, he went our of him.  And
he became as dead, so that many said: He is dead.

9:26. But Jesus taking him by the hand, lifted him up. And he arose.

9:27. And when he was come into the house, his disciples secretly asked
him: Why could not we cast him out?

9:28. And he said to them: This kind can go out by nothing, but by
prayer and fasting.

9:29. And departing from thence, they passed through Galilee: and he
would not that any man should know it.

9:30. And he taught his disciples and said to them: The Son of man shall
be betrayed into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; and after
that he is killed, he shall rise again the third day.

9:31. But they understood not the word: and they were afraid to ask him.

9:32. And they came to Capharnaum. And when they were in the house, he
asked them: What did you treat of in the way?

9:33. But they held their peace, for in the way they had disputed among
themselves, which of them should be the greatest.

9:34. And sitting down, he called the twelve and saith to them: If any
man desire to be first, he shall be the last of all and be minister of
all.

9:35. And taking a child, he set him in the midst of them. Whom when he
had embraced, he saith to them:

9:36. Whosoever shall receive one such child as this in my name
receiveth me. And whosoever shall receive me receiveth not me but him
that sent me.

9:37. John answered him, saying: Master, we saw one casting out devils
in thy name, who followeth not us: and we forbade him.

9:38. But Jesus said: Do not forbid him. For there is no man that doth a
miracle in my name and can soon speak ill of me.

9:39. For he that is not against you is for you.

9:40. For whosoever shall give you to drink a cup of water in my name,
because you belong to Christ: amen I say to you, he shall not lose his
reward.

9:41. And whosoever shall scandalize one of these little ones that
believe in me: it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about
his neck and he were cast into the sea.

9:42. And if thy hand scandalize thee, cut it off: it is better for thee
to enter into life, maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into
unquenchable fire:

9:43. Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not extinguished.

9:44. And if thy foot scandalize thee, cut it off: it is better for thee
to enter lame into life everlasting than having two feet to be cast into
the hell of unquenchable fire:

9:45. Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not extinguished.

9:46. And if thy eye scandalize thee, pluck it out: it is better for
thee with one eye to enter into the kingdom of God than having two eyes
to be cast into the hell of fire:

9:47. Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not extinguished.

9:48. For every one shall be salted with fire: and every victim shall be
salted with salt.

9:49. Salt is good. But if the salt become unsavoury, wherewith will you
season it? Have salt in you: and have peace among you.

Mark Chapter 10

Marriage is not to be dissolved. The danger of riches. The ambition of
the sons of Zebedee. A blind man is restored to his sight.

10:1. And rising up from thence, he cometh into the coast of Judea
beyond the Jordan: and the multitude flocked to him again. And as he was
accustomed, he taught them again.

10:2. And the Pharisees coming to him asked him, tempting him: Is it
lawful for a man to put away his wife?

10:3. But he answering, saith to them: What did Moses command you?

10:4. Who said: Moses permitted to write a bill of divorce and to put
her away.

10:5. To whom Jesus answering, said: Because of the hardness of your
heart, he wrote you that precept.

10:6. But from the beginning of the creation, God made them male and
female.

10:7. For this cause, a man shall leave his father and mother and shall
cleave to his wife.

10:8. And they two shall be in one flesh. Therefore now they are not
two, but one flesh.

10:9. What therefore God hath joined together, let no man put asunder.

10:10. And in the house again his disciples asked him concerning the
same thing.

10:11. And he saith to them: Whosoever shall put away his wife and marry
another committeth adultery against her.

10:12. And if the wife shall put away her husband and be married to
another, she committeth adultery.

10:13. And they brought to him young children, that he might touch them.
And the disciples rebuked them that brought them.

10:14. Whom when Jesus saw, he was much displeased and saith to them:
Suffer the little children to come unto me and forbid them not: for of
such is the kingdom of God.

10:15. Amen I say to you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God
as a little child shall not enter into it.

10:16. And embracing them and laying his hands upon them, he blessed
them.

10:17. And when he was gone forth into the way, a certain man, running
up and kneeling before him, asked him: Good Master, what shall I do that
I may receive life everlasting?

10:18. And Jesus said to him: Why callest thou me good? None is good but
one, that is God.

None is good... Of himself entirely and essentially, but God alone; men
may be good also, but only by participation of God's goodness.

10:19. Thou knowest the commandments: Do not commit adultery, do not
kill, do not steal, bear not false witness, do no fraud, honour thy
father and mother.

10:20. But he answering, said to him: Master, all these things I have
observed from my youth.

10:21. And Jesus, looking on him, loved him and said to him: One thing
is wanting unto thee. Go, sell whatsoever thou hast and give to the
poor: and thou shalt have treasure in heaven. And come, follow me.

10:22. Who being struck sad at that saying, went away sorrowful: for he
had great possessions.

10:23. And Jesus looking round about, saith to his disciples: How hardly
shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!

10:24. And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus again
answering, saith to them: Children, how hard is it for them that trust
in riches to enter into the kingdom of God?

10:25. It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

10:26. Who wondered the more, saying among themselves: Who then can be
saved?

10:27. And Jesus looking on them, saith with men it is impossible; but
not with God. For all things are possible with God.

10:28. And Peter began to say unto him: Behold, we have left all things
and have followed thee.

10:29. Jesus answering said: Amen I say to you, there is no man who hath
left house or brethren or sisters or father or mother or children or
lands, for my sake and for the gospel,

10:30. Who shall not receive an hundred times as much, now in this time:
houses and brethren and sisters and mothers and children and lands, with
persecutions: and in the world to come life everlasting.

10:31. But many that are first shall be last: and the last, first.

10:32. And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem: and Jesus went
before them. And they were astonished and following were afraid. And
taking again the twelve, he began to tell them the things that should
befall him.

10:33. Saying: Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be
betrayed to the chief priests and to the scribes and ancients. And they
shall condemn him to death and shall deliver him to the Gentiles.

10:34. And they shall mock him and spit on him and scourge him and kill
him: and the third day he shall rise again.

10:35. And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, come to him, saying:
Master, we desire that whatsoever we shall ask, thou wouldst do it for
us.

10:36. But he said to them: What would you that I should do for you?

10:37. And they said: Grant to us that we may sit, one on thy right hand
and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory.

10:38. And Jesus said to them: You know not what you ask. Can you drink
of the chalice that I drink of or be baptized with the baptism wherewith
I am baptized?

10:39. But they said to him: We can. And Jesus saith to them: You shall
indeed drink of the chalice that I drink of; and with the baptism
wherewith I am baptized you shall be baptized.

10:40. But to sit on my right hand or on my left is not mine to give to
you, but to them for whom it is prepared.

10:41. And the ten, hearing it, began to be much displeased at James and
John.

10:42. But Jesus calling them, saith to them: You know that they who
seem to rule over the Gentiles lord it over them: and their princes have
power over them.

10:43. But it is not so among you: but whosoever will be greater shall
be your minister.

10:44. And whosoever will be first among you shall be the servant of
all.

10:45. For the Son of man also is not come to be ministered unto: but to
minister and to give his life a redemption for many.

10:46. And they came to Jericho. And as he went out of Jericho with his
disciples and a very great multitude, Bartimeus the blind man, the son
of Timeus, sat by the way side begging.

10:47. Who when he had heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, began to cry
out and to say: Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me.

10:48. And many rebuked him, that he might hold his peace; but he cried
a great deal the more: Son of David, have mercy on me.

10:49. And Jesus, standing still, commanded him to be called. And they
call the blind man, saying to him: Be of better comfort.  Arise, he
calleth thee.

10:50. Who casting off his garment leaped up and came to him.

10:51. And Jesus answering, said to him: What wilt thou that I should do
to thee? And the blind man said to him: Rabboni. That I may see.

10:52. And Jesus saith to him: Go thy way. Thy faith hath made thee
whole. And immediately he saw and followed him in the way.

Mark Chapter 11

Christ enters into Jerusalem upon an ass. He curses the barren fig tree
and drives the buyers and sellers out of the temple.

11:1. And when they were drawing near to Jerusalem and to Bethania, at
the mount of Olives, he sendeth two of his disciples,

11:2. And saith to them: Go into the village that is over against you,
and immediately at your coming in thither, you shall find a colt tied,
upon which no man yet hath sat. Loose him and bring him.

11:3. And if any man shall say to you: What are you doing? Say ye that
the Lord hath need of him. And immediately he will let him come hither.

11:4. And going their way, they found the colt tied before the gate
without, in the meeting of two ways. And they loose him.

11:5. And some of them that stood there said to them: What do you
loosing the colt?

11:6. Who said to them as Jesus had commanded them. And they let him go
with them.

11:7. And they brought the colt to Jesus. And they lay their garments on
him: and he sat upon him.

11:8. And many spread their garments in the way: and others cut down
boughs from the trees and strewed them in the way.

11:9. And they that went before and they that followed cried, saying:
Hosanna: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.

11:10. Blessed be the kingdom of our father David that cometh: Hosanna
in the highest.

11:11. And he entered into Jerusalem, into the temple: and having viewed
all things round about, when now the eventide was come, he went out to
Bethania with the twelve.

11:12. And the next day when they came out from Bethania, he was hungry.

11:13. And when he had seen afar off a fig tree having leaves, he came,
if perhaps he might find any thing on it. And when he was come to it, he
found nothing but leaves. For it was not the time for figs.

11:14. And answering he said to it: May no man hereafter eat fruit of
thee any more for ever! And his disciples heard it.

11:15. And they came to Jerusalem. And when he was entered into the
temple, he began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple:
and over threw the tables of the moneychangers and the chairs of them
that sold doves.

11:16. And he suffered not that any man should carry a vessel through
the temple.

11:17. And he taught, saying to them: Is it not written: My house shall
be called the house of prayer to all nations, but you have made it a den
of thieves.

11:18. Which when the chief priests and the scribes had heard, they
sought how they might destroy him. For they feared him, because the
whole multitude was in admiration at his doctrine.

11:19. And when evening was come, he went forth out of the city.

11:20. And when they passed by in the morning they saw the fig tree
dried up from the roots.

11:21. And Peter remembering, said to him: Rabbi, behold the fig tree
which thou didst curse is withered away.

11:22. And Jesus answering, saith to them: Have the faith of God.

11:23. Amen I say to you that whosoever shall say to this mountain, Be
thou removed and be cast into the sea, and shall not stagger in his
heart, but be believe that whatsoever he saith shall be done; it shall
be done unto him.

11:24. Therefore I say unto you, all things, whatsoever you ask when ye
pray, believe that you shall receive: and they shall come unto you.

11:25. And when you shall stand to pray, forgive, if you have aught
against any man: that your Father also, who is in heaven, may forgive
you your sins.

11:26. But if you will not forgive, neither will your father that is in
heaven forgive you your sins.

11:27. And they come again to Jerusalem. And when he was walking in the
temple, there come to him the chief priests and the scribes and the
ancients.

11:28. And they say to him: By what authority dost thou these things?
And who hath given thee this authority that thou shouldst do these
things?

11:29. And Jesus answering, said to them: I will also ask you one word.
And answer you me: and I will tell you by what authority I do these
things.

11:30. The baptism of John, was it from heaven or from men? Answer me.

11:31. But they thought with themselves, saying: If we say, From heaven;
he will say, Why then did you not believe him?

11:32. If we say, From men, we fear the people. For all men counted John
that he was a prophet indeed.

11:33. And they answering, say to Jesus: We know not. And Jesus
answering, saith to them: Neither do I tell you by what authority I do
these things.

Mark Chapter 12

The parable of the vineyard and husbandmen. Caesar's right to tribute.
The Sadducees are confuted. The first commandment.  The widow's mite.

12:1. And he began to speak to them in parables: A certain man planted a
vineyard and made a hedge about it and dug a place for the winefat and
built a tower and let it to husbandmen: and went into a far country.

12:2. And at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant to receive
of the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard.

12:3. Who, having laid hands on him, beat and sent him away empty.

12:4. And again he sent to them another servant: and him they wounded in
the head and used him reproachfully.

12:5. And again he sent another, and him they killed: and many others,
of whom some they beat, and others they killed.

12:6. Therefore, having yet one son, most dear to him, he also sent him
unto them last of all, saying: They will reverence my son.

12:7. But the husbandmen said one to another: This is the heir.  Come
let us kill him and the inheritance shall be ours.

12:8. And laying hold on him, they killed him and cast him out of the
vineyard.

12:9. What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do? He will come and
destroy those husbandmen and will give the vineyard to others.

12:10. And have you not read this scripture, The stone which the
builders rejected, the same is made the head of the corner:

12:11. By the Lord has this been done, and it is wonderful in our eyes.

12:12. And they sought to lay hands on him: but they feared the people.
For they knew that he spoke this parable to them. And leaving him, they
went their way.

12:13. And they sent to him some of the Pharisees and of the Herodians:
that they should catch him in his words.

12:14. Who coming, say to him: Master, we know that thou art a true
speaker and carest not for any man; for thou regardest not the person of
men, but teachest the way of God in truth. Is it lawful to give tribute
to Caesar? Or shall we not give it?

12:15. Who knowing their wiliness, saith to them: Why tempt you me?
Bring me a penny that I may see it.

12:16. And they brought it him. And he saith to them: Whose is this
image and inscription? They say to him, Caesar's.

12:17. And Jesus answering, said to them: Render therefore to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's and to God the things that are God's. And they
marvelled at him.

12:18. And there came to him the Sadducees, who say there is no
resurrection. And they asked him, saying:

12:19. Master, Moses wrote unto us that if any man's brother die and
leave his wife behind him and leave no children, his brother should take
his wife and raise up seed to his brother.

12:20. Now there were seven brethren: and the first took a wife and died
leaving no issue.

12:21. And the second took her and died: and neither did he leave any
issue. And the third in like manner.

12:22. And the seven all took her in like manner and did not leave
issue. Last of all the woman also died.

12:23. In the resurrection therefore, when they shall rise again, whose
wife shall she be of them? For the seven had her to wife.

12:24. And Jesus answering, saith to them: Do ye not therefore err,
because you know not the scriptures nor the power of God?

12:25. For when they shall rise again from the dead, they shall neither
marry, nor be married, but are as the angels in heaven.

12:26. And as concerning the dead that they rise again have you not read
in the book of Moses, how in the bush God spoke to him, saying: I am the
God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob?

12:27. He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. You therefore
do greatly err.

12:28. And there came one of the scribes that had heard them reasoning
together, and seeing that he had answered them well, asked him which was
the first commandment of all.

12:29. And Jesus answered him: The first commandment of all is, Hear, O
Israel: the Lord thy God is one God.

12:30. And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart and
with thy whole soul and with thy whole mind and with thy whole strength.
This is the first commandment.

12:31. And the second is like to it: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself. There is no other commandment greater than these.

12:32. And the scribe said to him: Well, Master, thou hast said in truth
that there is one God and there is no other besides him.

12:33. And that he should be loved with the whole heart and with the
whole understanding and with the whole soul and with the whole strength.
And to love one's neighbour as one's self is a greater thing than all
holocausts and sacrifices.

12:34. And Jesus seeing that he had answered wisely, said to him: Thou
art not far from the kingdom of God. And no man after that durst ask him
any question.

12:35. And Jesus answering, said, teaching in the temple: How do the
scribes say that Christ is the son of David?

12:36. For David himself saith by the Holy Ghost: The Lord said to my
Lord: Sit on my right hand, until I make thy enemies thy footstool.

12:37. David therefore himself calleth him Lord. And whence is he then
his son? And a great multitude heard him gladly.

12:38. And he said to them in his doctrine: Beware of the scribes, who
love to walk in long robes and to be saluted in the marketplace,

12:39. And to sit in the first chairs in the synagogues and to have the
highest places at suppers:

12:40. Who devour the houses of widows under the pretence of long
prayer. These shall receive greater judgment.

12:41. And Jesus sitting over against the treasury, beheld how the
people cast money into the treasury. And many that were rich cast in
much.

12:42. And there came a certain poor widow: and she cast in two mites,
which make a farthing.

12:43. And calling his disciples together, he saith to them: Amen I say
to you, this poor widow hath cast in more than all they who have cast
into the treasury.

12:44. For all they did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want
cast in all she had, even her whole living.

Mark Chapter 13

Christ foretells the destruction of the temple and the signs that shall
forerun the day of judgment.

13:1. And as he was going out of the temple, one of his disciples said
to him: Master, behold what manner of stones and what buildings are
here.

13:2. And Jesus answering, said to him: Seest thou all these great
buildings? There shall not be left a stone upon a stone, that shall not
be thrown down.

13:3. And as he sat on the mount of Olivet over against the temple,
Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him apart:

13:4. Tell us, when shall these things be and what shall be the sign
when all these things shall begin to be fulfilled?

13:5. And Jesus answering, began to say to them: Take heed lest any man
deceive you.

13:6. For many shall come in my name saying, I am he: and they shall
deceive many.

13:7. And when you shall hear of wars and rumours of wars, fear ye not.
For such things must needs be: but the end is not yet.

13:8. For nation shall rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom:
and there shall be earthquakes in divers places and famines. These
things are the beginning of sorrows.

13:9. But look to yourselves. For they shall deliver you Up to councils:
and in the synagogues you shall be beaten: and you shall stand before
governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony unto them.

13:10. And unto all nations the gospel must first be preached.

13:11. And when they shall lead you and deliver you up, be not
thoughtful beforehand what you shall speak: but whatsoever shall be
given you in that hour, that speak ye. For it is not you that speak, but
the Holy Ghost.

13:12. And the brother shall betray his brother unto death, and the
father his son; and children shall rise up against their parents and
shall work their death.

13:13. And you shall be hated by all men for my name's sake. But he that
shall endure unto the end, he shall be saved.

13:14. And when you shall see the abomination of desolation, standing
where it ought not (he that readeth let him understand): then let them
that are in Judea flee unto the mountains.

13:15. And let him that is on the housetop not go down into the house
nor enter therein to take any thing out of the house.

13:16. And let him that shall be in the field not turn back to take up
his garment.

13:17. And woe to them that are with child and that give suck in those
days.

13:18. But pray ye that these things happen not in winter.

13:19. For in those days shall be such tribulations as were not from the
beginning of the creation which God created until now: neither shall be.

13:20. And unless the Lord had shortened the days, no flesh should be
saved: but, for the sake of the elect which he hath chosen, he hath
shortened the days.

13:21. And then if any man shall say to you: Lo, here is Christ.  Lo, he
is here: do not believe.

13:22. For there will rise up false Christs and false prophets: and they
shall shew signs and wonders, to seduce (if it were possible) even the
elect.

13:23. Take you heed therefore: behold, I have foretold you all things.

13:24. But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be
darkened and the moon shall not give her light.

13:25. And the stars of heaven shall be falling down and the powers that
are in heaven shall be moved.

13:26. And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds, with
great power and glory.

13:27. And then shall he send his angels and shall gather together his
elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the
uttermost part of heaven.

13:28. Now of the fig tree learn ye a parable. When the branch thereof
is now tender and the leaves are come forth, you know that summer is
very near.

13:29. So you also when you shall see these things come to pass, know ye
that it is very nigh, even at the doors.

13:30. Amen, I say to you that this generation shall not pass until all
these things be done.

13:31. Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my word shall not pass
away.

13:32. But of that day or hour no man knoweth, neither the angels in
heaven, nor the Son, but the Father.

Nor the Son... Not that the Son of God is absolutely ignorant of the day
of judgment, but that he knoweth it not, as our teacher; that is, he
knoweth it not so as to teach it to us, as not being expedient.

13:33. Take ye heed, watch and pray. For ye know not when the time is.

13:34. Even as a man who, going into a far country, left his house and
gave authority to his servants over every work and commanded the porter
to watch.

13:35. Watch ye therefore (for you know not when the lord of the house
cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cock crowing, or in the
morning):

13:36. Lest coming on a sudden, he find you sleeping.

13:37. And what I say to you, I say to all: Watch.

Mark Chapter 14

The first part of the history of the passion of Christ.

14:1. Now the feast of the pasch and of the Azymes was after two days:
and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might by some wile
lay hold on him and kill him.

Azymes... That is, the feast of the unleavened bread.

14:2. But they said: Not on the festival day, lest there should be a
tumult among the people.

14:3. And when he was in Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper, and
was at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment of
precious spikenard. And breaking the alabaster box, she poured it out
upon his head.

14:4. Now there were some that had indignation within themselves and
said: Why was this waste of the ointment made?

14:5. For this ointment might have been sold for more than three hundred
pence and given to the poor. And they murmured against her.

14:6. But Jesus said: Let her alone. Why do You molest her? She hath
wrought a good work upon me.

14:7. For the poor you have always with you: and whensoever you will,
you may do them good: but me you have not always.

14:8. She hath done what she could: she is come beforehand to anoint my
body for the burial.

14:9. Amen, I say to you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in
the whole world, that also which she hath done shall be told for a
memorial of her.

14:10. And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief priests,
to betray him to them.

14:11. Who hearing it were glad: and they promised him they would give
him money. And he sought how he might conveniently betray him.

14:12. Now on the first day of the unleavened bread, when they
sacrificed the pasch, the disciples say to him: Whither wilt thou that
we go and prepare for thee to eat the pasch?

14:13. And he sendeth two of his disciples and saith to them: Go ye into
the city; and there shall meet you a man carrying a pitcher of water.
Follow him.

14:14. And whithersoever he shall go in, say to the master of the house,
The master saith, Where is my refectory, where I may eat the pasch with
my disciples?

14:15. And he will shew you a large dining room furnished. And there
prepare ye for us.

14:16. And his disciples went their way and came into the city.  And
they found as he had told them: and they prepared the pasch.

14:17. And when evening was come, he cometh with the twelve.

14:18. And when they were at table and eating, Jesus saith: Amen I say
to you, one of you that eateth with me shall betray me.

14:19. But they began to be sorrowful and to say to him, one by one: Is
it I?

14:20. Who saith to them: One of the twelve, who dippeth with me his
hand in the dish.

14:21. And the Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him: but woe
to that man by whom the Son of man shall be betrayed.  It were better
for him, if that man had not been born.

14:22. And whilst they were eating, Jesus took bread; and blessing,
broke and gave to them and said: Take ye. This is my body.

14:23. And having taken the chalice, giving thanks, he gave it to them.
And they all drank of it.

14:24. And he said to them: This is my blood of the new testament, which
shall be shed for many.

14:25. Amen I say to you that I will drink no more of the fruit of the
vine until that day when I shall drink it new in the kingdom of God.

14:26. And when they had sung an hymn, they went forth to the mount of
Olives.

14:27. And Jesus saith to them: You will all be scandalized in my regard
this night. For it is written: I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep
shall be dispersed.

14:28. But after I shall be risen again, I will go before you into
Galilee.

14:29. But Peter saith to him: Although all shall be scandalized in
thee, yet not I.

14:30. And Jesus saith to him: Amen I say to thee, to-day, even in this
night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice.

Crow twice... The cocks crow at two different times of the night; viz.,
about midnight for the first time; and then about the time commonly
called the cock crowing; and this was the cock crowing our Saviour spoke
of; and therefore the other Evangelists take no notice of the first
crowing.

14:31. But he spoke the more vehemently: Although I should die together
with thee, I will not deny thee. And in like manner also said they all.

14:32. And they came to a farm called Gethsemani. And he saith to his
disciples: Sit you here, while I pray.

14:33. And he taketh Peter and James and John with him: and he began to
fear and to be heavy.

14:34. And he saith to them: My soul is sorrowful even unto death.  Stay
you here and watch.

14:35. And when he was gone forward a little, he fell flat on the
ground: and he prayed that, if it might be, the hour might pass from
him.

14:36. And he saith: Abba, Father, all things are possible to thee:
remove this chalice from me; but not what I will, but what thou wilt.

14:37. And he cometh and findeth them sleeping. And he saith to Peter:
Simon, sleepest thou? Couldst thou not watch one hour?

14:38. Watch ye: and pray that you enter not into temptation. The spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

14:39. And going away again, he prayed, saying the same words.

14:40. And when he returned, he found them again asleep (for their eyes
were heavy): and they knew not what to answer him.

14:41. And he cometh the third time and saith to them: Sleep ye now and
take your rest. It is enough. The hour is come: behold the Son of man
shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners.

14:42. Rise up: let us go. Behold, he that will betray me is at hand.

14:43. And while he was yet speaking, cometh Judas Iscariot, one of the
twelve: and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the
chief priests and the scribes and the ancients.

14:44. And he that betrayed him had given them a sign, saying:
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he. Lay hold on him: and lead him away
carefully.

14:45. And when he was come, immediately going up to him he saith: Hail,
Rabbi! And he kissed him.

14:46. But they laid hands on him and held him.

14:47. And one of them that stood by, drawing a sword, struck a servant
of the chief priest and cut off his ear.

14:48. And Jesus answering, said to them: Are you come out as to a
robber, with swords and staves to apprehend me?

14:49. I was daily with you in the temple teaching: and you did not lay
hands on me. But that the scriptures may be fulfilled.

14:50. Then his disciples, leaving him, all fled away.

14:51. And a certain young man followed him, having a linen cloth cast
about his naked body. And they laid hold on him.

14:52. But he, casting off the linen cloth, fled from them naked.

14:53. And they brought Jesus to the high priest. And all the priests
and the scribes and the ancients assembled together.

14:54. And Peter followed him afar off, even into the court of the high
priest. And he sat with the servants at the fire and warmed himself.

14:55. And the chief priests and all the council sought for evidence
against Jesus, that they might put him to death: and found none.

14:56. For many bore false witness against him: and their evidences were
not agreeing.

14:57. And some rising up, bore false witness against him, saying:

14:58. We heard him say, I Will destroy this temple made with hands and
within three days I will build another not made with hands.

14:59. And their witness did not agree.

14:60. And the high priest rising up in the midst, asked Jesus, saying:
Answerest thou nothing to the things that are laid to thy charge by
these men?

14:61. But he held his peace and answered nothing. Again the high priest
asked him and said to him: Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed
God?

14:62. And Jesus said to him: I am. And you shall see the Son of man
sitting on the right hand of the power of God and coming with the clouds
of heaven.

14:63. Then the high priest rending his garments, saith: What need we
any further witnesses?

14:64. You have heard the blasphemy. What think you? Who all condemned
him to be guilty of death.

14:65. And some began to spit on him and to cover his face and to buffet
him and to say unto him: Prophesy. And the servants struck him with the
palms their hands.

14:66. Now when Peter was in the court below, there cometh one of the
maid-servants of the high priest.

14:67. And when she had seen Peter warming himself looking on him, she
saith: Thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth.

14:68. But he denied, saying: I neither know nor understand what thou
sayest. And he went forth before the court; and the cock crew.

14:69. And again a maid-servant seeing him, began to say to the standers
by: This is one of them.

14:70. But he denied again. And after a, while they that stood by said
again to Peter: Surely thou art one of them; for thou art also a
Galilean.

14:71. But he began o curse and to swear, saying: I know not this man of
whom you speak.

14:72. And immediately the cock crew again. And Peter remembered the
word that Jesus had said unto him: Before the cock crow twice, thou
shalt thrice deny me. And he began to weep,

Mark Chapter 15

The continuation of the history of the passion.

15:1. And straightway in the morning, the chief priests holding a
consultation with the ancients and the scribes and the whole council,
binding Jesus, led him away and delivered him to Pilate.

15:2. And Pilate asked him: Art thou the king of the Jews? But he
answering, saith to him: Thou sayest it.

15:3. And the chief priests accused him in many things.

15:4. And Pilate again asked him, saying: Answerest thou nothing?
Behold in how many things they accuse thee.

15:5. But Jesus still answered nothing: so that Pilate wondered.

15:6. Now on the festival day he was wont to release unto them one of
the prisoners, whomsoever they demanded.

15:7. And there was one called Barabbas, who was put in prison with some
seditious men, who in the sedition had committed murder.

15:8. And when the multitude was come up, they began to desire that he
would do as he had ever done unto them.

15:9. And Pilate answered them and said: Will you that I release to you
the king of the Jews?

15:10. For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him up out of
envy.

15:11. But the chief priests moved the people, that he should rather
release Barabbas to them.

15:12. And Pilate again answering, saith to them: What will you then
that I do to the king of the Jews?

15:13. But they again cried out: Crucify him.

15:14. And Pilate saith to them: Why, what evil hath he done? But they
cried out the more: Crucify him.

15:15. And so Pilate being willing to satisfy the people, released to
them Barabbas: and delivered up Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be
crucified.

15:16. And the soldiers led him away into the court of the palace: and
they called together the whole band.

15:17. And they clothed him with purple: and, platting a crown of
thorns, they put it upon him.

15:18. And they began to salute him: Hail, king of the Jews.

15:19. And they struck his head with a reed: and they did spit on him.
And bowing their knees, they adored him.

15:20. And after they had mocked him, they took off the purple from him
and put his own garments on him: and they led him out to crucify him.

15:21. And they forced one Simon a Cyrenian, who passed by coming out of
the country, the father of Alexander and of Rufus, to take up his cross.

15:22. And they bring him into the place called Golgotha, which being
interpreted is, The place of Calvary.

15:23. And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh. But he took
it not.

15:24. And crucifying him, they divided his garments, casting lots upon
them, what every man should take.

15:25. And it was the third hour: and they crucified him.

The third hour... The ancient account divided the day into four parts,
which were named from the hour from which they began; the first, third,
sixth, and ninth hour. Our Lord was crucified a little before noon;
before the third hour had quite expired; but when the sixth hour was
near at hand.

15:26. And the inscription of his cause was written over: THE KING OF
THE JEWS.

15:27. And with him they crucify two thieves: the one on his right hand,
and the other on his left.

15:28. And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith: And with the wicked
he was reputed.

15:29. And they that passed by blasphemed him, wagging their heads and
saying: Vah, thou that destroyest the temple of God and in three days
buildest it up again:

15:30. Save thyself, coming down from the cross.

15:31. In like manner also the chief priests, mocking, said with the
scribes one to another: He saved others; himself he cannot save.

15:32. Let Christ the king of Israel come down now from the cross, that
we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him, reviled
him.

15:33. And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the
whole earth until the ninth hour.

15:34. And at the ninth hour, Jesus cried out with a loud voice, saying:
Eloi, Eloi, lamma sabacthani? Which is, being interpreted: My God, My
God, Why hast thou forsaken me?

15:35. And some of the standers by hearing, said: Behold he calleth
Elias.

15:36. And one running and filling a sponge with vinegar and putting it
upon a reed, gave him to drink, saying: Stay, let us see if Elias come
to take him down.

15:37. And Jesus, having cried out with a loud voice, gave up the ghost.

15:38. And the veil of the temple was rent in two, from the top to the
bottom.

15:39. And the centurion who stood over against him, seeing that crying
out in this manner he had given up the ghost, said: Indeed this man was
the son of God.

15:40. And there were also women looking on afar off: among whom was
Mary Magdalen and Mary the mother of James the Less and of Joseph and
Salome,

15:41. Who also when he was in Galilee followed him and ministered to
him, and many other women that came up with him to Jerusalem.

15:42. And when evening was now come (because it was the Parasceve, that
is, the day before the sabbath),

15:43. Joseph of Arimathea, a noble counsellor, who was also himself
looking for the kingdom of God, came and went in boldly to Pilate and
begged the body of Jesus.

15:44. But Pilate wondered that he should be already dead. And sending
for the centurion, he asked him if he were already dead.

15:45. And when he had understood it by the centurion, he gave the body
to Joseph.

15:46. And Joseph, buying fine linen and taking him down, wrapped him up
in the fine linen and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewed out of a
rock. And he rolled a stone to the door of the sepulchre.

15:47. And Mary Magdalen and Mary the mother of Joseph, beheld where he
was laid.

Mark Chapter 16

Christ's resurrection and ascension.

16:1. And when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalen and Mary the mother
of James and Salome bought sweet spices, that coming, they might anoint
Jesus.

16:2. And very early in the morning, the first day of the week, they
come to the sepulchre, the sun being now risen.

The sun being now risen... They set out before it was light, to go to
the sepulchre; but the sun was risen when they arrived there. Or,
figuratively, the sun here spoken of is the sun of justice, Christ Jesus
our Lord, who was risen before their coming.

16:3. And they said one to another: Who shall roll us back the stone
from the door of the sepulchre?

16:4. And looking, they saw the stone rolled back. For it was very
great.

16:5. And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on
the right side, clothed with a white robe: and they were astonished.

16:6. Who saith to them: Be not affrighted; you seek Jesus of Nazareth,
who was crucified. He is risen: he is not here.  Behold the place where
they laid him.

16:7. But go, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you into
Galilee. There you shall see him, as he told you.

16:8. But they going out, fled from the sepulchre: for a trembling and
fear had seized them. And they said nothing to any man: for they were
afraid.

16:9. But he rising early the first day of the week, appeared first to
Mary Magdalen; out of whom he had cast seven devils.

16:10. She went and told them that had been with him, who were mourning
and weeping.

16:11. And they hearing that he was alive and had been seen by her, did
not believe.

16:12. And after that he appeared in another shape to two of them
walking, as they were going into the country.

16:13. And they going told it to the rest: neither did they believe
them.

16:14. At length he appeared to the eleven as they were at table: and he
upbraided them with their incredulity and hardness of heart, because
they did not believe them who had seen him after he was risen again.

16:15. And he said to them: Go ye into the whole world and preach the
gospel to every creature.

16:16. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved: but he that
believeth not shall he condemned.

16:17. And these signs shall follow them that believe: In my name they
shall cast out devils. They shall speak with new tongues.

16:18. They shall take up serpents: and if they shall drink any deadly
thing, it shall not hurt them. They shall lay their hand upon the sick:
and they shall recover.

16:19. And the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken to them, was taken up
into heaven and sitteth on the right hand of God.

16:20. But they going forth preached every where: the Lord working
withal, and confirming the word with signs that followed.






THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE

St. Luke was a native of Antioch, the capital of Syria. He was by
profession a physician; and some ancient writers say, that he was very
skillful in painting. He was converted by St. Paul and became his
disciple and companion in his travels, and fellow-labourer in the
ministry of the Gospel. He wrote in Greek, about twenty-four years after
our Lord's Ascension.


Luke Chapter 1

The conception of John the Baptist, and of Christ. The visitation and
canticle of the Blessed Virgin. The birth of the Baptist and the
canticle of Zachary.

1:1. Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a
narration of the things that have been accomplished among us,

1:2. According as they have delivered them unto us, who from the
beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word:

1:3. It seemed good to me also, having diligently attained to all things
from the beginning, to write to thee in order, most excellent
Theophilus,

1:4. That thou mayest know the verity of those words in which thou hast
been instructed.

1:5. There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a certain priest
named Zachary, of the course of Abia: and his wife was of the daughters
of Aaron, and her name Elizabeth.

Of the course of Abia... that is, of the rank of Abia, which word in the
Greek is commonly put for the employment of one day: but here for the
functions of a whole week. For, by the appointment of David, 1 Par. 24.,
the descendants from Aaron were divided into twenty-four families, of
which the eighth was Abia, from whom descended this Zachary, who at this
time was in the week of his priestly functions.

1:6. And they were both just before God, walking in all the commandments
and justifications of the Lord without blame.

1:7. And they had no son, for that Elizabeth was barren: and they both
were well advanced in years.

1:8. And it came to pass, when he executed the priestly function in the
order of his course before God,

1:9. According to the custom of the priestly office, it was his lot to
offer incense, going into the temple of the Lord.

1:10. And all the multitude of the people was praying without, at the
hour of incense.

1:11. And there appeared to him an angel of the Lord, standing on the
right side of the altar of incense.

1:12. And Zachary seeing him, was troubled: and fear fell upon him.

1:13. But the angel said to him: Fear not, Zachary, for thy prayer is
heard: and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son.  And thou shalt
call his name John.

1:14. And thou shalt have joy and gladness: and many shall rejoice in
his nativity.

1:15. For he shall be great before the Lord and shall drink no wine nor
strong drink: and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his
mother's womb.

1:16. And he shall convert many of the children of Israel to the Lord
their God.

1:17. And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias: that
he may turn the hearts of the fathers unto the children and the
incredulous to the wisdom of the just, to prepare unto the Lord a
perfect people.

1:18. And Zachary said to the angel: Whereby shall I know this?  For I
am an old man, and my wife is advanced in years.

1:19. And the angel answering, said to him: I am Gabriel, who stand
before God and am sent to speak to thee and to bring thee these good
tidings.

1:20. And behold, thou shalt be dumb and shalt not be able to speak
until the day wherein these things shall come to pass: because thou hast
not believed my words, which shall be fulfilled in their time.

1:21. And the people were waiting for Zachary: and they wondered that he
tarried so long in the temple.

1:22. And when he came out, he could not speak to them: and they
understood that he had seen a vision in the temple. And he made signs to
them and remained dumb.

1:23. And it came to pass, after the days of his office were
accomplished, he departed to his own house.

1:24. And after those days, Elizabeth his wife conceived and hid herself
five months, saying:

1:25. Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he hath had
regard to take away my reproach among men.

1:26. And in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God into a
city of Galilee, called Nazareth,

1:27. To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house
of David: and the virgin's name was Mary.

1:28. And the angel being come in, said unto her: Hail, full of grace,
the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.

1:29. Who having heard, was troubled at his saying and thought with
herself what manner of salutation this should be.

1:30. And the angel said to her: Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found
grace with God.

1:31. Behold thou shalt conceive in thy womb and shalt bring forth a
son: and thou shalt call his name Jesus.

1:32. He shall be great and shall be called the Son of the Most High.
And the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of David his father: and
he shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever.

1:33. And of his kingdom there shall be no end.

1:34. And Mary said to the angel: How shall this be done, because I know
not man?

1:35. And the angel answering, said to her: The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee. And
therefore also the Holy which shall be born of thee shall be called the
Son of God.

1:36. And behold thy cousin Elizabeth, she also hath conceived a son in
her old age: and this is the sixth month with her that is called barren.

1:37. Because no word shall be impossible with God.

1:38. And Mary said: Behold the handmaid of the Lord: be it done to me
according to thy word. And the angel departed from her.

1:39. And Mary rising up in those days, went into the hill country with
haste into a city of Juda.

1:40. And she entered into the house of Zachary and saluted Elizabeth.

1:41. And it came to pass that when Elizabeth heard the salutation of
Mary, the infant leaped in her womb. And Elizabeth was filled with the
Holy Ghost.

1:42. And she cried out with a loud voice and said: Blessed art thou
among women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.

1:43. And whence is this to me that the mother of my Lord should come to
me?

1:44. For behold as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in my
ears, the infant in my womb leaped for joy.

1:45. And blessed art thou that hast believed, because those things
shall be accomplished that were spoken to thee by the Lord.

1:46. And Mary said: My soul doth magnify the Lord.

1:47. And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.

1:48. Because he hath regarded the humility of his handmaid: for behold
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

Shall call me blessed... These words are a prediction of that honour
which the church in all ages should pay to the Blessed Virgin. Let
Protestants examine whether they are any way concerned in this prophecy.

1:49. Because he that is mighty hath done great things to me: and holy
is his name.

1:50. And his mercy is from generation unto generations, to them that
fear him.

1:51. He hath shewed might in his arm: he hath scattered the proud in
the conceit of their heart.

1:52. He hath put down the mighty from their seat and hath exalted the
humble.

1:53. He hath filled the hungry with good things: and the rich he hath
sent empty away.

1:54. He hath received Israel his servant, being mindful of his mercy.

1:55. As he spoke to our fathers: to Abraham and to his seed for ever.

1:56. And Mary abode with her about three months. And she returned to
her own house.

1:57. Now Elizabeth's full time of being delivered was come: and she
brought forth a son.

1:58. And her neighbors and kinsfolks heard that the Lord had shewed his
great mercy towards her: and they congratulated with her.

1:59. And it came to pass that on the eighth day they came to circumcise
the child: and they called him by his father's name Zachary.

1:60. And his mother answering, said: Not so. But he shall be called
John.

1:61. And they said to her: There is none of thy kindred that is called
by this name.

1:62. And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called.

1:63. And demanding a writing table, he wrote, saying: John is his name.
And they all wondered.

1:64. And immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue loosed: and he
spoke, blessing God.

1:65. And fear came upon all their neighbours: and all these things were
noised abroad over all the hill country of Judea.

1:66. And all they that had heard them laid them up in their heart,
saying: What an one, think ye, shall this child be? For the hand of the
Lord was with him.

1:67. And Zachary his father was filled with the Holy Ghost. And he
prophesied, saying:

1:68. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: because he hath visited and
wrought the redemption of his people.

1:69. And hath raised up an horn of salvation to us, in the house of
David his servant.

Horn of salvation... That is, A powerful salvation, as Dr. Witham
translates it. For in the Scripture, by horn is generally understood
strength and power.

1:70. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, who are from the
beginning.

1:71. Salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all that hate us.

1:72. To perform mercy to our fathers and to remember his holy
testament.

1:73. The oath, which he swore to Abraham our father, that he would
grant to us.

1:74. That being delivered from the hand of our enemies, we may serve
him without fear:

1:75. In holiness and justice before him, all our days.

1:76. And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest: for
thou shalt, go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways:

1:77. To give knowledge of salvation to his people, unto the remission
of their sins.

1:78. Through the bowels of the mercy of our God, in which the Orient
from on high hath visited us:

The Orient... It is one of the titles of the Messias, the true light of
the world, and the sun of justice.

1:79. To enlighten them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death:
to direct our feet into the way of peace.

1:80. And the child grew and was strengthened in spirit: and was in the
deserts until the day of his manifestation to Israel.

Luke Chapter 2

The birth of Christ. His presentation in the temple. Simeon's prophecy.
Christ at twelve years of age, is found amongst the doctors.

2:1. And it came to pass that in those days there went out a decree from
Caesar Augustus that the whole world should be enrolled.

2:2. This enrolling was first made by Cyrinus, the governor of Syria.

2:3. And all went to be enrolled, every one into his own city.

2:4. And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth,
into Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem: because he
was of the house and family of David.

2:5. To be enrolled with Mary his espoused wife, who was with child.

2:6. And it came to pass that when they were there, her days were
accomplished that she should be delivered.

2:7. And she brought forth her first born son and wrapped him up in
swaddling clothes and laid him in a manger: because there was no room
for them in the inn.

Her firstborn... The meaning is, not that she had afterward any other
child; but it is a way of speech among the Hebrews, to call them also
the firstborn, who are the only children. See annotation Matt. 1. 25.

2:8. And there were in the same country shepherds watching and keeping
the night watches over their flock.

2:9. And behold an angel of the Lord stood by them and the brightness of
God shone round about them: and they feared with a great fear.

2:10. And the angel said to them: Fear not; for, behold, I bring you
good tidings of great joy that shall be to all the people:

2:11. For, this day is born to you a Saviour, who is Christ the Lord, in
the city of David.

2:12. And this shall be a sign unto you. You shall find the infant
wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in a manger.

2:13. And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly
army, praising God and saying:

2:14. Glory to God in the highest: and on earth peace to men of good
will.

2:15. And it came to pass, after the angels departed from them into
heaven, the shepherds said one to another: Let us go over to Bethlehem
and let us see this word that is come to pass, which the Lord hath
shewed to us.

2:16. And they came with haste: and they found Mary and Joseph, and the
infant lying in the manger.

2:17. And seeing, they understood of the word that had been spoken to
them concerning this child.

2:18. And all that heard wondered: and at those things that were told
them by the shepherds.

2:19. But Mary kept all these words, pondering them in her heart.

2:20. And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all
the things they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.

2:21. And after eight days were accomplished, that the child should be
circumcised, his name was called JESUS, which was called by the angel
before he was conceived in the womb.

2:22. And after the days of her purification, according to the law of
Moses, were accomplished, they carried him to Jerusalem, to present him
to the Lord:

2:23. As it is written in the law of the Lord: Every male opening the
womb shall be called holy to the Lord:

2:24. And to offer a sacrifice, according as it is written in the law of
the Lord, a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons:

2:25. And behold there was a man in Jerusalem named Simeon: and this man
was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel. And the Holy
Ghost was in him.

2:26. And he had received an answer from the Holy Ghost, that he should
not see death before he had seen the Christ of the Lord.

2:27. And he came by the Spirit into the temple. And when his parents
brought in the child Jesus, to do for him according to the custom of the
law,

2:28. He also took him into his arms and blessed God and said

2:29. Now thou dost dismiss thy servant, O Lord, according to thy word
in peace:

2:30. Because my eyes have seen thy salvation,

2:31. Which thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples:

2:32. A light to the revelation of the Gentiles and the glory of thy
people Israel.

2:33. And his father and mother were wondering at those things which
were spoken concerning him.

2:34. And Simeon blessed them and said to Mary his mother: Behold this
child is set for the fall and for the resurrection of many in Israel and
for a sign which shall be contradicted.

For the fall, etc... Christ came for the salvation of all men; but here
Simeon prophesies what would come to pass, that many through their own
wilful blindness and obstinacy would not believe in Christ, nor receive
his doctrine, which therefore would be ruin to them: but to others a
resurrection, by their believing in him, and obeying his commandments.

2:35. And thy own soul a sword shall pierce, that, out of many hearts
thoughts may be revealed.

2:36. And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of
the tribe of Aser. She was far advanced in years and had lived with her
husband seven years from her virginity.

2:37. And she was a widow until fourscore and four years: who departed
not from the temple, by fastings and prayers serving night and day.

2:38. Now she, at the same hour, coming in, confessed to the Lord: and
spoke of him to all that looked for the redemption of Israel.

2:39. And after they had performed all things according to the law of
the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their city Nazareth.

2:40. And the child grew and waxed strong, full of wisdom: and the grace
of God was in him.

2:41. And his parents went every year to Jerusalem, at the solemn day of
the pasch.

2:42. And when he was twelve years old, they going up into Jerusalem,
according to the custom of the feast,

2:43. And having fulfilled the days, when they returned, the child Jesus
remained in Jerusalem. And his parents knew it not.

2:44. And thinking that he was in the company, they came a day's journey
and sought him among their kinsfolks and acquaintance.

2:45. And not finding him, they returned into Jerusalem, seeking him.

2:46. And it came to pass, that, after three days, they found him in the
temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, hearing them and asking
them questions.

2:47. And all that heard him were astonished at his wisdom and his
answers.

2:48. And seeing him, they wondered. And his mother said to him: Son,
why hast thou done so to us? Behold thy father and I have sought thee
sorrowing.

2:49. And he said to them: How is it that you sought me? Did you not
know that I must be about my father's business?

2:50. And they understood not the word that he spoke unto them.

2:51. And he went down with them and came to Nazareth and was subject to
them. And his mother kept all these words in her heart.

2:52. And Jesus advanced in wisdom and age and grace with God and men.

Luke Chapter 3

John's mission and preaching. Christ is baptized by him.

3:1. Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius
Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and
Philip his brother tetrarch of Iturea and the country of Trachonitis,
and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilina:

3:2. Under the high priests Anna and Caiphas: the word of the Lord was
made unto John, the son of Zachary, in the desert.

3:3. And he came into all the country about the Jordan, preaching the
baptism of penance for the remission of sins.

3:4. As it was written in the book of the sayings of Isaias the prophet:
A voice of one crying in the wilderness: Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make straight his paths.

3:5. Every valley shall be filled and every mountain and hill shall be
brought low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways
plain.

3:6. And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.

3:7. He said therefore to the multitudes that went forth to be baptized
by him: Ye offspring of vipers, who hath shewed you to flee from the
wrath to come?

3:8. Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of penance: and do not begin to
say, We have Abraham for our father. For I say unto you that God is able
of these stones, to raise up children to Abraham.

3:9. For now the axe is laid to the root of the trees. Every tree
therefore that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be cut down and cast
into the fire.

3:10. And the people asked him, saying: What then shall we do?

3:11. And he answering, said to them: He that hath two coats, let him
give to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do in like
manner.

3:12. And the publicans also came to be baptized and said to him:
Master, what shall we do?

3:13. But he said to them: Do nothing more than that which is appointed
you.

3:14. And the soldiers also asked him, saying: And what shall we do? And
he said to them: Do violence to no man, neither calumniate any man; and
be content with your pay.

3:15. And as the people were of opinion, and all were thinking in their
hearts of John, that perhaps he might be the Christ:

3:16. John answered, saying unto all: I indeed baptize you with water:
but there shall come one mightier than I, the latchet of whose shoes I
am not worthy to loose. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and
with fire;

3:17. Whose fan is in his hand: and he will purge his floor and will
gather the wheat into his barn: but the chaff he will burn with
unquenchable fire.

3:18. And many other things exhorting did he preach to the people.

3:19. But Herod the tetrarch, when he was reproved by him for Herodias,
his brother's wife, and for all the evils which Herod had done:

3:20. He added this also above all and shut up John in prison.

3:21. Now it came to pass, when all the people were baptized, that Jesus
also being baptized and praying, heaven was opened.

3:22. And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape, as a dove, upon
him. And a voice came from heaven: Thou art my beloved Son. In thee I am
well pleased.

3:23. And Jesus himself was beginning about the age of thirty years:
being (as it was supposed) the son of Joseph, who was of Heli, who was
of Mathat,

Who was of Heli... St. Joseph, who by nature was the son of Jacob, (St.
Matt. 1. 16,) in the account of the law, was son of Heli. For Heli and
Jacob were brothers, by the same mother; and Heli, who was the elder,
dying without issue, Jacob, as the law directed, married his widow: in
consequence of such marriage, his son Joseph was reputed in the law the
son of Heli.

3:24. Who was of Levi, who was of Melchi, who was of Janne, who was of
Joseph,

3:25. Who was of Mathathias, who was of Amos, who was of Nahum, who was
of Hesli, who was of Nagge,

3:26. Who was of Mahath, who was of Mathathias, who was of Semei, who
was of Joseph, who was of Juda,

3:27. Who was of Joanna, who was of Reza, who was of Zorobabel, who was
of Salathiel, who was of Neri,

3:28. Who was of Melchi, who was of Addi, who was of Cosan, who was of
Helmadan, who was of Her,

3:29. Who was of Jesus, who was of Eliezer, who was of Jorim, who was of
Mathat, who was of Levi,

3:30. Who was of Simeon, who was of Judas, who was of Joseph, who was of
Jona, who was of Eliakim,

3:31. Who was of Melea, who was of Menna, who was of Mathatha, who was
of Nathan, who was of David,

3:32. Who was of Jesse, who was of Obed, who was of Booz, who was of
Salmon, who was of Naasson,

3:33. Who was of Aminadab, who was of Aram, who was of Esron, who was of
Phares, who was of Judas,

3:34. Who was of Jacob, who was of Isaac, who was of Abraham, who was of
Thare, who was of Nachor,

3:35. Who was of Sarug, who was of Ragau, who was of Phaleg, who was of
Heber, who was of Sale,

3:36. Who was of Cainan, who was of Arphaxad, who was of Sem, who was Of
Noe, who was of Lamech,

3:37. Who was of Mathusale, who was of Henoch, who was of Jared, who was
of Malaleel, who was of Cainan,

3:38. Who was of Henos, who was of Seth, who was of Adam, who was of
God.

Luke Chapter 4

Christ's fasting and temptation. He is persecuted in Nazareth.  His
miracles in Capharnaum.

4:1. And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, returned from the Jordan
and was led by the spirit into the desert,

4:2. For the space of forty days, and was tempted by the devil.  And he
ate nothing in those days. And when they were ended, he was hungry.

4:3. And the devil said to him: If thou be the Son of God, say to this
stone that it be made bread.

4:4. And Jesus answered him: is written that Man liveth not by bread
alone, but by every word of God.

4:5. And the devil led him into a high mountain and shewed him all the
kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.

4:6. And he said to him: To thee will I give all this power and the
glory of them. For to me they are delivered: and to whom I will, I give
them.

4:7. If thou therefore wilt adore before me, all shall be thine.

4:8. And Jesus answering said to him. It is written: Thou shalt adore
the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.

4:9. And he brought him to Jerusalem and set him on a pinnacle of the
temple and said to him: If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself from
hence.

4:10. For it is written that He hath given his angels charge over thee
that they keep thee.

4:11. And that in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest perhaps thou
dash thy foot against a stone.

4:12. And Jesus answering, said to him: It is said: Thou shalt not tempt
the Lord thy God.

4:13. And all the temptation being ended, the devil departed from him
for a time.

4:14. And Jesus returned in the power of the spirit, into Galilee: and
the fame of him went out through the whole country.

4:15. And he taught in their synagogues and was magnified by all.

4:16. And he came to Nazareth, where he was brought up: and he went into
the synagogue, according to his custom, on the sabbath day: and he rose
up to read.

4:17. And the book of Isaias the prophet was delivered unto him.  And as
he unfolded the book, he found the place where it was written:

4:18. The spirit of the Lord is upon me. Wherefore he hath anointed me
to preach the gospel to the poor, he hath sent me to heal the contrite
of heart,

4:19. To preach deliverance to the captives and sight to the blind, to
set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of
the Lord and the day of reward.

4:20. And when he had folded the book, he restored it to the minister
and sat down. And the eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed on him.

4:21. And he began to say to them: This day is fulfilled this scripture
in your ears.

4:22. And all gave testimony to him. And they wondered at the words of
grace that proceeded from his mouth. And they said: Is not this the son
of Joseph?

4:23. And he said to them: Doubtless you will say to me this similitude:
Physician, heal thyself. As great things as we have heard done in
Capharnaum, do also here in thy own country.

4:24. And he said: Amen I say to you that no prophet is accepted in his
own country.

4:25. In truth I say to You, there were many widows in the days of Elias
in Israel, when heaven was shut up three years and six months, when
there was a great famine throughout all the earth.

4:26. And to none of them was Elias sent, but to Sarepta of Sidon, to a
widow woman.

4:27. And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of Eliseus the
prophet: and none of them was cleansed but Naaman the Syrian.

4:28. And all they in the synagogue, hearing these things, were filled
with anger.

4:29. And they rose up and thrust him out of the city: and they brought
him to the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they
might cast him down headlong.

4:30. But he passing through the midst of them, went his way.

4:31. And he went down into Capharnaum, a city of Galilee: and there he
taught them on the sabbath days.

4:32. And they were astonished at his doctrine: for his speech was with
power.

4:33. And in the synagogue there was a man who had an unclean devil: and
he cried out with a loud voice,

4:34. Saying: Let us alone. What have we to do with thee, Jesus of
Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the
holy one of God.

4:35. And Jesus rebuked him, saying: Hold thy peace and go out of him.
And when the devil had thrown him into the midst, he went out of him and
hurt him not at all.

4:36. And there came fear upon all; and they talked among themselves,
saying: What word is this, for with authority and power he commandeth
the unclean spirits, and they go out?

4:37. And the fame of him was published into every place of the country.

4:38. And Jesus rising up out of the synagogue, went into Simon's house.
And Simon's wife's mother was taken with a great fever: and they
besought him for her.

4:39. And standing over her, he commanded the fever: and it left her.
And immediately rising, she ministered to them.

4:40. And when the sun was down, all they that had any sick with divers
diseases brought them to him. But he, laying his hands on every one of
them, healed them.

4:41. And devils went out from many, crying out and saying: Thou art the
son of God. And rebuking them he suffered them not to speak; for they
knew that he was Christ.

4:42. And when it was day, going out he went into a desert place: and
the multitudes sought him, and came unto him. And they stayed him that
should not depart from them.

4:43. To whom he said: To other cities also I must preach the kingdom of
God: for therefore am I sent.

4:44. And he was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.

Luke Chapter 5

The miraculous draught of fishes. The cure of the leper and of the
paralytic. The call of Matthew.

5:1. And it came to pass, that when the multitudes pressed upon him to
hear the word of God, he stood by the lake of Genesareth,

5:2. And saw two ships standing by the lake: but the fishermen were gone
out of them and were washing their nets.

5:3. And going into one of the ships that was Simon's, he desired him to
draw back a little from the land. And sitting, he taught the multitudes
out of the ship.

5:4. Now when he had ceased to speak, he said to Simon: Launch out into
the deep and let down your nets for a draught.

5:5. And Simon answering said to him: Master, we have laboured all the
night and have taken nothing: but at thy word I will let down the net.

5:6. And when they had done this, they enclosed a very great multitude
of fishes: and their net broke.

5:7. And they beckoned to their partners that were in the other ship,
that they should come and help them. And they came and filled both the
ships, so that they were almost sinking.

5:8. Which when Simon Peter saw, he fell down at Jesus' knees, saying:
Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord.

5:9. For he was wholly astonished, and all that were with him, at the
draught of the fishes which they had taken.

5:10. And so were also James and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were
Simon's partners. And Jesus saith to Simon: Fear not: from henceforth
thou shalt catch men.

5:11. And having brought their ships to land, leaving all things, they
followed him.

5:12. And it came to pass, when he was in a certain city, behold a man
full of leprosy who, seeing Jesus and falling on his face, besought him
saying: Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

5:13. And stretching forth his hand, he touched him, saying: I will. Be
thou cleansed. And immediately the leprosy departed from him.

5:14. And he charged him that he should tell no man, but: Go, shew
thyself to the priest and offer for thy cleansing according as Moses
commanded, for a testimony to them.

5:15. But the fame of him went abroad the more: and great multitudes
came together to hear and to be healed by him of their infirmities.

5:16. And he retired into the desert; and prayed.

5:17. And it came to pass on a certain day, as he sat teaching, that
there were also Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, that were
come out of every town of Galilee and Judea and Jerusalem: and the power
of the Lord was to heal them.

5:18. And behold, men brought in a bed a man who had the palsy: and they
sought means to bring him in and to lay him before him.

5:19. And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in,
because of the multitude, they went up upon the roof and let him down
through the tiles with his bed into the midst before Jesus.

5:20. Whose faith when he saw, he said: Man, thy sins are forgiven thee.

5:21. And the scribes and Pharisees began to think, saying: Who is this
who speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?

5:22. And when Jesus knew their thoughts, answering he said to them:
What is it you think in your hearts?

5:23. Which is easier to say: Thy sins are forgiven thee; or to say:
Arise and walk?

5:24. But that you may know that the Son of man hath the power on earth
to forgive sins (he saith to the sick of the palsy), I say to thee to:
Arise, take up thy bed and go into thy house.

5:25. And immediately rising up before them, he took up the bed on which
he lay: and he went away to his own house, glorifying God.

5:26. And all were astonished: and they glorified God. And they were
filled with fear, saying: We have seen wonderful things to-day.

5:27. And after these things, he went forth and saw a publican named
Levi, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he said to him: Follow me.

5:28. And leaving all things, he rose up and followed him.

5:29. And Levi made him a great feast in his own house: And there was a
great company of publicans and of others that were at table with them.

5:30. But the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying to his disciples:
Why do you eat and drink with publicans and sinners?

5:31. And Jesus answering, said to them: They that are whole need not
the physician: but they that are sick.

5:32. I came not to call the just, but sinners to penance.

5:33. And they said to him: Why do the disciples of John fast often and
make prayers, and the disciples of the Pharisees in like manner; but
thine eat and drink?

5:34. To whom he said: Can you make the children of the bridegroom fast
whilst the bridegroom is with them?

5:35. But the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them: then shall they fast in those days.

5:36. And he spoke also a similitude to them: That no man putteth a
piece from a new garment upon an old garment: otherwise he both rendeth
the new, and the piece taken from the new agreeth not with the old.

5:37. And no man putteth new wine into old bottles: otherwise the new
wine will break the bottles; and it will be spilled and the bottles will
be lost.

5:38. But new wine must be put into new bottles: and both are preserved.

5:39. And no man drinking old hath presently a mind to new: for he
saith: The old is better.

Luke Chapter 6

Christ excuses his disciples. He cures upon the sabbath day, chooses the
twelve and makes a sermon to them.

6:1. And it came to pass on the second first sabbath that, as he went
through the corn fields, his disciples plucked the ears and did eat,
rubbing them in their hands.

The second first sabbath... Some understand this of the sabbath of
Pentecost, which was the second in course among the great feasts:
others, of a sabbath day that immediately followed any solemn feast.

6:2. And some of the Pharisees said to them: Why do you that which is
not lawful on the sabbath days?

6:3. And Jesus answering them, said: Have you not read so much as this,
what David did, when himself was hungry and they that were with him:

6:4. How he went into the house of God and took and ate the bread of
proposition and gave to them that were with him, which is not lawful to
eat but only for the priests?

6:5. And he said to them: The Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.

6:6. And it came to pass also, on another sabbath, that he entered into
the synagogue and taught. And there was a man whose right hand was
withered.

6:7. And the scribes and Pharisees watched if he would heal on the
sabbath: that they might find an accusation against him.

6:8. But he knew their thoughts and said to the man who had the withered
hand: Arise and stand forth in the midst. And rising he stood forth.

6:9. Then Jesus said to them: I ask you, if it be lawful on the sabbath
days to do good or to do evil? To save life or to destroy?

6:10. And looking round about on them all, he said to the man: Stretch
forth thy hand. And he stretched it forth. And his hand was restored.

6:11. And they were filled with madness: and they talked one with
another, what they might do to Jesus.

6:12. And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a
mountain to pray: and he passed the whole night in the prayer of God.

6:13. And when day was come, he called unto him his disciples: and he
chose twelve of them (whom also he named apostles):

6:14. Simon, whom he surnamed Peter, and Andrew his brother, James and
John, Philip and Bartholomew,

6:15. Matthew and Thomas, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon who is
called Zelotes,

6:16. And Jude the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, who was the
traitor.

6:17. And coming down with them, he stood in a plain place: and the
company of his disciples and a very great multitude of people from all
Judea and Jerusalem and the sea coast, both of Tyre and Sidon,

6:18. Who were come to hear him and to be healed of their diseases. And
they that were troubled with unclean spirits were cured.

6:19. And all the multitude sought to touch him: for virtue went out
from him and healed all.

6:20. And he, lifting up his eyes on his disciples, said: Blessed are ye
poor: for yours is the kingdom of God.

6:21. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for you shall be filled.  Blessed
are ye that weep now: for you shall laugh.

6:22. Blessed shall you be when men shall hate you, and when they shall
separate you and shall reproach you and cast out your name as evil, for
the Son of man's sake.

6:23. Be glad in that day and rejoice: for behold, your reward is great
in heaven, For according to these things did their fathers to the
prophets.

6:24. But woe to you that are rich: for you have your consolation.

6:25. Woe to you that are filled: for you shall hunger. Woe to you that
now laugh: for you shall mourn and weep.

6:26. Woe to you when men shall bless you: for according to these things
did their fathers to the false prophets.

6:27. But I say to you that hear: Love your enemies. Do good to them
that hate you.

6:28. Bless them that curse you and pray for them that calumniate you.

6:29. And to him that striketh thee on the one cheek, offer also the
other. And him that taketh away from thee thy cloak, forbid not to take
thy coat also.

6:30. Give to every one that asketh thee: and of him that taketh away
thy goods, ask them not again.

6:31. And as you would that men should do to you, do you also to them in
like manner.

6:32. And if you love them that love you, what thanks are to you?  For
sinners also love those that love them.

6:33. And if you do good to them who do good to you, what thanks are to
you? For sinners also do this.

6:34. And if you lend to them of whom you hope to receive, what thanks
are to you? For sinners also lend to sinners, for to receive as much.

6:35. But love ye your enemies: do good, and lend, hoping for nothing
thereby: and your reward shall be great, and you shall be the sons of
the Highest. For he is kind to the unthankful and to the evil.

6:36. Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful.

6:37. Judge not: and you shall not be judged. Condemn not: and you shall
not be condemned. Forgive: and you shall be forgiven.

6:38. Give: and it shall be given to you: good measure and pressed down
and shaken together and running over shall they give into your bosom.
For with the same measure that you shall mete withal, it shall be
measured to you again.

6:39. And he spoke also to them a similitude: Can the blind lead the
blind? Do they not both fall into the ditch?

6:40. The disciple is not above his master: but every one shall be
perfect, if he be as his master.

6:41. And why seest thou the mote in thy brother's eye: but the beam
that is in thy own eye thou considerest not?

6:42. Or how canst thou say to thy brother: Brother, let me pull the
mote out of thy eye, when thou thyself seest not the beam in thy own
eye? Hypocrite, cast first the beam out of thy own eye: and then shalt
thou see clearly to take out the mote from thy brother's eye.

6:43. For there is no good tree that bringeth forth evil fruit: nor an
evil tree that bringeth forth good fruit.

6:44. For every tree is known by its fruit. For men do not gather figs
from thorns: nor from a bramble bush do they gather the grape.

6:45. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth
that which is good: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth
forth that which is evil. For out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaketh.

6:46. And why call you me, Lord, Lord; and do not the things which I
say?

6:47. Every one that cometh to me and heareth my words and doth them, I
will shew you to whom he is like.

6:48. He is like to a man building a house, who digged deep and laid the
foundation upon a rock. And when a flood came, the stream beat
vehemently upon that house: and it could not shake it: for it was
founded on a rock.

6:49. But he that heareth and doth not is like to a man building his
house upon the earth without a foundation: against which the stream beat
vehemently. And immediately it fell: and the ruin of that house was
great.

Luke Chapter 7

Christ heals the centurion's servant. He raises the widow's son to life,
answers the messengers sent by John and absolves the penitent sinner.

7:1. And when he had finished all his words in the hearing of the
people, he entered into Capharnaum.

7:2. And the servant of a certain centurion who was dear to him, being
sick, was ready to die.

7:3. And when he had heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the ancients of
the Jews, desiring him to come and heal his servant.

7:4. And when they came to Jesus, they besought him earnestly, saying to
him: He is worthy that thou shouldest do this for him.

7:5. For he loveth our nation: and he hath built us a synagogue.

7:6. And Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the
house, the centurion sent his friends to him, saying: Lord, trouble not
thyself; for I am not worthy that thou shouldst enter under my roof.

7:7. For which cause neither did I think myself worthy to come to thee:
but say the word, and my servant shall be healed.

7:8. For I also am a man subject to authority, having under me soldiers:
and I say to one, Go, and he goeth: and to another, Come, and he cometh;
and to my servant, Do this, and he doth it.

7:9. Which Jesus hearing, marvelled: and turning about to the multitude
that followed him, he said: Amen I say to you, I have not found so great
faith, not even in Israel.

7:10. And they who were sent, being returned to the house, found the
servant whole who had been sick.

7:11. And it came to pass afterwards that he went into a city that is
called Naim: and there went with him his disciples and a great
multitude.

7:12. And when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold a dead man
was carried out, the only son of his mother: and she was a widow. And a
great multitude of the city was with her.

7:13. Whom when the Lord had seen, being moved with mercy towards her,
he said to her: Weep not.

7:14. And he came near and touched the bier. And they that carried it
stood still. And he said: Young man, I say to thee, arise.

7:15. And he that was dead sat up and begun to speak. And he gave him to
his mother.

7:16. And there came a fear upon them all: and they glorified God
saying: A great prophet is risen up among us: and, God hath visited his
people.

7:17. And this rumour of him went forth throughout all Judea and
throughout all the country round about.

7:18. And John's disciples told him of all these things.

7:19. And John called to him two of his disciples and sent them to
Jesus, saying: Art thou he that art to come? Or look we for another?

7:20. And when the men were come unto him, they said: John the Baptist
hath sent us to thee, saying: Art thou he that art to come? Or look we
for another?

7:21. (And in that same hour, he cured many of their diseases and hurts
and evil spirits: and to many that were blind he gave sight.)

7:22. And answering, he said to them: Go and relate to John what you
have heard and seen: the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are made
clean, the deaf hear, the dead rise again, to the poor the gospel is
preached.

7:23. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be scandalized in me.

7:24. And when the messengers of John were departed, he began to speak
to the multitudes concerning John. What went ye out into the desert to
see? A reed shaken with the wind?

7:25. But what went you out to see? A man clothed in soft garments?
Behold they that are in costly apparel and live delicately are in the
houses of kings.

7:26. But what went you out to see? A prophet? Yea, I say to you, and
more than a prophet.

7:27. This is he of whom it is written: Behold I send my angel before
thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.

7:28. For I say to you: Amongst those that are born of men, there is not
a greater prophet than John the Baptist. But he that is the lesser in
the kingdom of God is greater than he.

7:29. And all the people hearing, and the publicans, justified God,
being baptized with John's baptism.

Justified God... that is, praised the justice of God, feared and
worshipped God, as just and merciful.

7:30. But the Pharisees and the lawyers despised the counsel of God
against themselves, being not baptized by him.

7:31. And the Lord said: Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this
generation? And to what are they like?

7:32. They are like to children sitting in the marketplace and speaking
one to another and saying: We have piped to you, and you have not
danced: we have mourned, and you have not wept.

7:33. For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine.
And you say: He hath a devil.

7:34. The Son of man is come eating and drinking. And you say: Behold a
man that is a glutton and a drinker of wine, a friend of publicans and
sinners.

7:35. And wisdom is justified by all her children.

7:36. And one of the Pharisees desired him to eat with him. And he went
into the house of the Pharisee and sat down to meat.

One of the Pharisees: that is, Simon.

7:37. And behold a woman that was in the city, a sinner, when she knew
that he sat at meat in the Pharisee's house, brought an alabaster box of
ointment.

7:38. And standing behind at his feet, she began to wash his feet with
tears and wiped them with the hairs of her head and kissed his feet and
anointed them with the ointment.

7:39. And the Pharisee, who had invited him, seeing it, spoke within
himself, saying: This man, if he were if a prophet, would know surely
who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him, that she is a
sinner.

7:40. And Jesus answering, said to him: Simon, I have somewhat to say to
thee. But he said: Master, say it.

7:41. A certain creditor had two debtors: the one owed five hundred
pence and the other fifty.

7:42. And whereas they had not wherewith to pay, he forgave them both.
Which therefore of the two loveth him most?

7:43. Simon answering, said: I suppose that he to whom he forgave most.
And he said to him: Thou hast judged rightly.

7:44. And turning to the woman, he said unto Simon: Dost thou see this
woman? I entered into thy house: thou gavest me no water for my feet.
But she with tears hath washed my feet; and with her hairs hath wiped
them.

7:45. Thou gavest me no kiss. But she, since she cane in, hath not
ceased to kiss my feet.

7:46. My head with oil thou didst not anoint. But she with ointment hath
anointed my feet.

7:47. Wherefore, I say to thee: Many sins are forgiven her, because she
hath loved much. But to whom less is forgiven, he loveth less.

Many sins are forgiven her, because she hath loved much... In the
scripture an effect sometimes seems attributed to one only cause, when
there are divers other concurring dispositions; for the sins of this
woman, in this verse, are said to be forgiven, because she loved much:
but (ver. 50) Christ tells her, Thy faith hath made thee safe. Hence in
a true conversion are joined faith, hope, love, sorrow for sin, and
other pious dispositions.

7:48. And he said to her: Thy sins are forgiven thee.

7:49. And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves:
Who is this that forgiveth sins also?

7:50. And he said to the woman: Thy faith hath made thee safe.  Go in
peace.

Luke Chapter 8

The parable of the seed. Christ stills the storm at sea, casts out the
legion, heals the issue of blood and raises the daughter of Jairus to
life.

8:1. And it came to pass afterwards he travelled through the cities and
towns, preaching and evangelizing the kingdom of God: and the twelve
with him:

8:2. And certain women who had been healed of evil spirits and
infirmities: Mary who is called Magdalen, out of whom seven devils were
gone forth,

8:3. And Joanna the wife of Chusa, Herod's steward, and Susanna and many
others who ministered unto him of their substance.

8:4. And when a very great multitude was gathered together and hastened
out of the cities, unto him, he spoke by a similitude.

8:5. The sower went out to sow his seed. And as he sowed, some fell by
the way side. And it was trodden down: and the fowls of the air devoured
it.

8:6. And other some fell upon a rock. And as soon as it was sprung up,
it withered away, because it had no moisture.

8:7. And other some fell among thorns. And the thorns growing up with
it, choked it.

8:8. And other some fell upon good ground and, being sprung up, yielded
fruit a hundredfold. Saying these things, he cried out: He that hath
ears to hear, let him hear.

8:9. And his disciples asked him what this parable might be.

8:10. To whom he said: To you it is given to know the mystery of the
kingdom of God; but to the rest in parables, that seeing they may not
see and hearing may not understand.

Seeing they may not see... See the annotation, Mark 4. 12.

8:11. Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.

8:12. And they by the way side are they that hear: then the devil cometh
and taketh the word out of their heart, lest believing they should be
saved.

8:13. Now they upon the rock are they who when they hear receive the
word with joy: and these have no roots: for they believe for a while and
in time of temptation they fall away.

8:14. And that which fell among thorns are they who have heard and,
going their way, are choked with the cares and riches and pleasures of
this life and yield no fruit.

8:15. But that on the good ground are they who in a good and perfect
heart, hearing the word, keep it and bring forth fruit in patience.

8:16. Now no man lighting a candle covereth it with a vessel or putteth
it under a bed: but setteth it upon a candlestick, that they who come in
may see the light.

8:17. For there is not any thing secret that shall not be made manifest,
nor hidden that shall not be known and come abroad.

8:18. Take heed therefore how you hear. For whosoever hath, to him shall
be given: and whosoever hath not, that also which he thinketh he hath
shall be taken away from him.

8:19. And his mother and brethren came unto him: and they could not come
at him for the crowd.

8:20. And it was told him: Thy mother and thy brethren stand without,
desiring to see thee.

8:21. Who answering, said to them: My mother and my brethren are they
who hear the word of God and do it.

8:22. And it came to pass on a certain day that he went into a little
ship with his disciples. And he said to them: Let us go over to the
other side of the lake. And they launched forth.

8:23. And when they were sailing, he slept. And there came down a storm
of wind upon the lake: and they were filled and were in danger.

8:24. And they came and awaked him, saying: Master, we perish.  But he
arising, rebuked the wind and the rage of the water. And it ceased: and
there was a calm.

8:25. And he said to them: Where is your faith? Who being afraid,
wondered, saying one to another: Who is this (think you), that he
commandeth both the winds and the sea: and they obey him?

8:26. And they sailed to the country of the Gerasens, which is over
against Galilee.

8:27. And when he was come forth to the land, there met him a certain
man who had a devil now a very long time. And he wore no clothes:
neither did he abide in a house, but in the sepulchres.

8:28. And when he saw Jesus, he fell down before him. And crying out
with a loud voice, he said: What have I to do with thee, Jesus, Son of
the most high God? I beseech thee, do not torment me.

8:29. For he commanded the unclean spirit to go out of the man.  For
many times it seized him: and he was bound with chains and kept in
fetters: and breaking the bonds, he was driven by the devil into the
deserts.

8:30. And Jesus asked him, saying: What is thy name? But he said:
Legion. Because many devils were entered into him.

8:31. And they besought him that he would not command them to go into
the abyss.

8:32. And there was there a herd of many swine feeding on the mountain:
and they besought him that he would suffer them to enter into them. And
he suffered them.

8:33. The devils therefore went out of the man and entered into the
swine. And the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake and
were stifled.

8:34. Which when they that fed them saw done, they fled away and told it
in the city and in the villages.

8:35. And they went out to see what was done. And they came to Jesus and
found the man out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at his feet,
clothed and in his right mind. And they were afraid.

8:36. And they also that had seen told them how he had been healed from
the legion.

8:37. And all the multitude of the country of the Gerasens besought him
to depart from them: for they were taken with great fear. And he, going
up into the ship, returned back again.

8:38. Now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him that
he might be with him. But Jesus sent him away, saying:

8:39. Return to thy house and tell how great things God hath done to
thee. And he went through the whole city, publishing how great things
Jesus had done to him.

8:40. And it came to pass that when Jesus was returned, the multitude
received him: for they were all waiting for him.

8:41. And behold there came a man whose name was Jairus: and he was a
ruler of the synagogue. And he fell down at the feet of Jesus,
beseeching him that he would come into his house:

8:42. For he had an only daughter, almost twelve years old, and she was
dying. And it happened as he went that he was thronged by the
multitudes.

8:43. And there was a certain woman having an issue of blood twelve
years, who had bestowed all her substance on physicians and could not be
healed by any.

8:44. She came behind him and touched the hem of his garment: and
immediately the issue of her blood stopped.

8:45. And Jesus said: Who is it that touched me? And all denying, Peter
and they that were with him said: Master, the multitudes throng and
press thee; and dost thou say, who touched me?

8:46. And Jesus said: Somebody hath touched me; for I know that virtue
is gone out from me.

8:47. And the woman seeing that she was not hid, came trembling and fell
down before his feet and declared before all the people for what cause
she had touched him, and how she was immediately healed.

8:48. But he said to her: Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole. Go
thy way in peace.

8:49. As he was yet speaking, there cometh one to the ruler of the
synagogue, saying to him: Thy daughter is dead: trouble him not.

8:50. And Jesus hearing this word, answered the father of the maid: Fear
not. Believe only: and she shall be safe.

8:51. And when he was come to the house, he suffered not any man to go
in with him, but Peter and James and John, and the father and mother of
the maiden.

8:52. And all wept and mourned for her. But he said: Weep not.  The maid
is not dead, but sleepeth.

8:53. And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.

8:54. But he taking her by the hand, cried out, saying: Maid, arise.

8:55. And her spirit returned: and she arose immediately. And he bid
them give her to eat.

8:56. And her parents were astonished, whom he charged to tell no man
what was done.

Luke Chapter 9

Christ sends forth his apostles, feeds five thousand with five loaves,
is transfigured and casts out a devil.

9:1. Then calling together the twelve apostles, he gave them power and
authority over all devils and to cure diseases.

9:2. And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God and to heal the sick.

9:3. And he said to them: Take nothing for your journey, neither staff,
nor scrip, nor bread, nor money; neither have two coats.

9:4. And whatsoever house you shall enter into, abide there and depart
not from thence.

9:5. And whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city,
shake off even the dust of your feet, for a testimony against them.

9:6. And going out, they went about through the towns, preaching the
gospel and healing every where.

9:7. Now Herod, the tetrarch, heard of all things that were done by him.
And he was in a doubt, because it was said

9:8. By some that John was risen from the dead: but by other some, that
Elias had appeared: and by others, that one of the old prophets was
risen again.

9:9. And Herod said: John I have beheaded. But who is this of whom I
hear such things? And he sought to see him.

9:10. And the apostles, when they were returned, told him all they had
done. And taking them, he went aside into a desert place, apart, which
belongeth to Bethsaida.

9:11. Which when the people knew, they followed him: and he received
them and spoke to them of the kingdom of God and healed them who had
need of healing.

9:12. Now the day began to decline. And the twelve came and said to him:
Send away the multitude, that, going into the towns and villages round
about, they may lodge and get victuals; for we are here in a desert
place.

9:13. But he said to them: Give you them to eat. And they said: We have
no more than five loaves and two fishes; unless perhaps, we should go
and buy food for all this multitude.

9:14. Now there were about five thousand men. And he said to his
disciples: Make them sit down by fifties in a company.

9:15. And they did so and made them all sit down.

9:16. And taking the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to
heaven and blessed them: and he broke and distributed to his disciples,
to set before the multitude.

9:17. And they did all eat and were filled. And there were taken up of
fragments that remained to them, twelve baskets.

9:18. And it came to pass, as he was alone praying, his disciples also
were with him: and he asked them, saying: Whom do the people say that I
am?

9:19. But they answered and said: John the Baptist; but some say Elias:
and others say that one of the former prophets is risen again.

9:20. And he said to them: But whom do you say that I am? Simon Peter
answering, said: The Christ of God.

9:21. But he strictly charging them, commanded they should tell this to
no man.

9:22. Saying: The Son of man must suffer many things and be rejected by
the ancients and chief priests and scribes and be killed and the third
day rise again.

9:23. And he said to all: If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself and take up his cross daily and follow me.

9:24. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: for he that shall
lose his life for my sake shall save it.

9:25. For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world and lose
himself and cast away himself?

9:26. For he that shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him the Son
of man shall be ashamed, when he shall come in his majesty and that of
his Father and of the holy angels.

9:27. But I tell you of a truth: There are some standing here that shall
not taste death till they see the kingdom of God.

9:28. And it came to pass, about eight days after these words, that he
took Peter and James and John and went up into a mountain to pray.

9:29. And whilst he prayed, the shape of his countenance was altered and
his raiment became white and glittering.

9:30. And behold two men were talking with him. And they were Moses and
Elias,

9:31. Appearing in majesty. And they spoke of his decease that he should
accomplish in Jerusalem.

9:32. But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep. And
waking, they saw his glory and the two men that stood with him.

9:33. And it came to pass that, as they were departing from him, Peter
saith to Jesus: Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make
three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses; and one for Elias:
not knowing what he said.

9:34. And as he spoke these things, there came a cloud and overshadowed
them. And they were afraid when they entered into the cloud.

9:35. And a voice came out of the cloud; saying: This is my beloved son.
Hear him.

9:36. And whilst the voice was uttered Jesus was found alone.  And they
held their peace and told no man in those days any of these things which
they had seen.

9:37. And it came to pass the day following, when they came down from
the mountain, there met him a great multitude.

9:38. And behold a man among the crowd cried out, saying: Master, I
beseech thee, look upon my son, because he is my only one.

9:39. And lo, a spirit seizeth him, and he suddenly crieth out, and he
throweth him down and teareth him, so that he foameth; and bruising him,
he hardly departeth from him.

9:40. And I desired thy disciples to cast him out: and they could not.

9:41. And Jesus, answering, said: O faithless and perverse generation,
how long shall I be with you and suffer you? Bring hither thy son.

9:42. And as he was coming to him, the devil threw him down and tore
him.

9:43. And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit and cured the boy and
restored him to his father.

9:44. And all were astonished at the mighty power of God. But while all
wondered at all the things he did, he said to his disciples: Lay you up
in your hearts these words, for it shall come to pass that the Son of
man shall be delivered into the hands of men.

9:45. But they understood not this word: and it was hid from them, so
that they perceived it not. And they were afraid to ask him concerning
this word.

9:46. And there entered a thought into them, which of them should be
greater.

9:47. But Jesus seeing the thoughts of their hearts, took a child and
set him by him,

9:48. And said to them: Whosoever shall receive this child in my name
receiveth me; and whosoever shall receive me receiveth him that sent me.
For he that is the lesser among you all, he is the greater.

9:49. And John, answering, said: Master, we saw a certain man casting
out devils in thy name: and we forbade him, because he followeth not
with us.

9:50. And Jesus said to him: Forbid him not: for he that is not against
you is for you.

9:51. And it came to pass, when the days of his assumption were
accomplishing, that he steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem.

9:52. And he sent messengers before his face: and going, they entered
into a city of the Samaritans, to prepare for him.

9:53. And they received him not, because his face was of one going to
Jerusalem.

9:54. And when his disciples, James and John, had seen this, they said:
Lord, wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven and
consume them?

9:55. And turning, he rebuked them, saying: you know not of what spirit
you are.

9:56. The Son of man came not to destroy souls, but to save. And they
went into another town.

9:57. And it came to pass, as they walked in the way, that a certain man
said to him: I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.

9:58. Jesus said to him: The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air
nests: but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.

9:59. But he said to another: Follow me. And he said: Lord, suffer me
first to go and to bury my father.

9:60. And Jesus said to him: Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou
and preach the kingdom of God.

9:61. And another said: I will follow thee, Lord; but let me first take
my leave of them that are at my house.

9:62. Jesus said to him: No man putting his hand to the plough and
looking back is fit for the kingdom of God.

Luke Chapter 10

Christ sends forth and instructs his seventy-two disciples. The good
Samaritan.

10:1. And after these things, the Lord appointed also other seventy-two.
And he sent them two and two before his face into every city and place
whither he himself was to come.

10:2. And he said to them: The harvest indeed is great, but the
labourers are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that he
send labourers into his harvest.

10:3. Go: Behold I send you as lambs among wolves.

10:4. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by
the way.

10:5. Into whatever house you enter, first say: Peace be to this house.

10:6. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him:
but if not, it shall return to you.

10:7. And in the same house, remain, eating and drinking such things as
they have: for the labourer is worthy of his hire.  Remove not from
house to house.

10:8. And into what city soever you enter, and they receive you, eat
such things as are set before you.

10:9. And heal the sick that are therein and say to them: The kingdom of
God is come nigh unto you.

10:10. But into whatsoever city you enter, and they receive you not,
going forth into the streets thereof, say:

10:11. Even the very dust of your city that cleaveth to us, we wipe off
against you. Yet know this, that the kingdom of God is at hand.

10:12. I say to you, it shall be more tolerable at that day for Sodom
than for that city.

10:13. Woe to thee, Corozain! Woe to thee, Bethsaida! For if in Tyre and
Sidon had been wrought the mighty works that have been wrought in you,
they would have done penance long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.

10:14. But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment
than for you.

10:15. And thou, Capharnaum, which art exalted unto heaven, thou shalt
be thrust down to hell.

10:16. He that heareth you heareth me: and he that despiseth you
despiseth me: and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.

10:17. And the seventy-two returned with joy, saying: Lord, the devils
also are subject to us in thy name.

10:18. And he said to them: I saw Satan like lightning falling from
heaven.

10:19. Behold, I have given you power to tread upon serpents and
scorpions and upon all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall hurt
you.

10:20. But yet rejoice not in this, that spirits are subject unto you:
but rejoice in this, that your names are written in heaven.

10:21. In that same hour, he rejoiced in the Holy Ghost and said: I
confess to thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast
hidden these things from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them to
little ones. Yea, Father, for so it hath seemed good in thy sight.

He rejoiced in the Holy Ghost... That is, according to his humanity he
rejoiced in the Holy Ghost, and gave thanks to his eternal Father.

10:22. All things are delivered to me by my Father. And no one knoweth
who the Son is, but the Father: and who the Father is, but the Son and
to whom the Son will reveal him.

10:23. And turning to his disciples, he said: Blessed are the eyes that
see the things which you see.

10:24. For I say to you that many prophets and kings have desired to see
the things that you see and have not seen them; and to hear the things
that you hear and have not heard them.

10:25. And behold a certain lawyer stood up, tempting him and saying,
Master, what must I do to possess eternal life?

10:26. But he said to him: What is written in the law? How readest thou?

10:27. He answering, said: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy
whole heart and with thy whole soul and with all thy strength and with
all thy mind: and thy neighbour as thyself.

10:28. And he said to him: Thou hast answered right. This do: and thou
shalt live.

10:29. But he willing to justify himself, said to Jesus: And who is my
neighbour?

10:30. And Jesus answering, said: A certain man went down from Jerusalem
to Jericho and fell among robbers, who also stripped him and having
wounded him went away, leaving him half dead.

10:31. And it chanced, that a certain priest went down the same way: and
seeing him, passed by.

10:32. In like manner also a Levite, when he was near the place and saw
him, passed by.

10:33. But a certain Samaritan, being on his journey, came near him: and
seeing him, was moved with compassion:

10:34. And going up to him, bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and
wine: and setting him upon his own beast, brought him to an inn and took
care of him.

10:35. And the next day he took out two pence and gave to the host and
said: Take care of him; and whatsoever thou shalt spend over and above,
I, at my return, will repay thee.

10:36. Which of these three, in thy opinion, was neighbour to him that
fell among the robbers?

10:37. But he said: He that shewed mercy to him. And Jesus said to him:
Go, and do thou in like manner.

10:38. Now it came to pass, as they went, that he entered into a certain
town: and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house.

10:39. And she had a sister called Mary, who, sitting also at the Lord's
feet, heard his word.

10:40. But Martha was busy about much serving. Who stood and said: Lord,
hast thou no care that my sister hath left me alone to serve? Speak to
her therefore, that she help me.

10:41. And the Lord answering, said to her: Martha, Martha, thou art
careful and art troubled about many things:

10:42. But one thing is necessary. Mary hath chosen the best part, which
shall not be taken away from her.

Luke Chapter 11

Christ teaches his disciples to pray. He casts out a dumb devil,
confutes the Pharisees, and pronounces woes against them for their
hypocrisy.

11:1. And it came to pass that as he was in a certain place praying,
when he ceased, one of his disciples said to him: Lord, teach us to
pray, as John also taught his disciples.

11:2. And he said to them: When you pray, say: Father, hallowed be thy
name. Thy kingdom come.

11:3. Give us this day our daily bread.

11:4. And forgive us our sins, for we also forgive every one that is
indebted to us. And lead us not into temptation.

11:5. And he said to them: Which of you shall have a friend and shall go
to him at midnight and shall say to him: Friend, lend me three loaves,

11:6. Because a friend of mine is come off his journey to me and I have
not what to set before him.

11:7. And he from within should answer and say: Trouble me not; the door
is now shut, and my children are with me in bed. I cannot rise and give
thee.

11:8. Yet if he shall continue knocking, I say to you, although he will
not rise and give him because he is his friend; yet, because of his
importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needeth.

11:9. And I say to you: Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and you
shall find: knock, and it shall be opened to you.

11:10. For every one that asketh receiveth: and he that seeketh findeth:
and to him that knocketh it shall be opened:

11:11. And which of you, if he ask his father bread, will he give him a
stone? Or a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent?

11:12. Or if he shall ask an egg, will he reach him a scorpion?

11:13. If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your
children, how much more will your Father from heaven give the good
Spirit to them that ask him?

11:14. And he was casting out a devil: and the same was dumb. And when
he had cast out the devil, the dumb spoke: and the multitudes, were in
admiration at it.

11:15. But some of them said: He casteth out devils by Beelzebub, the
prince of devils.

11:16. And others tempting, asked of him a sign from heaven.

11:17. But he seeing their thoughts, said to them: Every kingdom divided
against itself shall be brought to desolation; and house upon house
shall fall.

11:18. And if Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his
kingdom stand? Because you say that through Beelzebub I cast out devils.

11:19. Now if I cast out devils by Beelzebub, by whom do your children
cast them out? Therefore, they shall be your judges.

11:20. But if I by the finger of God cast out devils, doubtless the
kingdom of God is come upon you.

11:21. When a strong man armed keepeth his court, those things are in
peace which he possesseth.

11:22. But if a stronger than he come upon him and overcome him, he will
take away all his armour wherein he trusted and will distribute his
spoils.

11:23. He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not
with me scattereth.

11:24. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through
places without water, seeking rest: and not finding, he saith: I will
return into my house whence I came out.

11:25. And when he is come, he findeth it swept and garnished.

11:26. Then he goeth and taketh with him seven other spirits more wicked
than himself: and entering in they dwell there. And the last state of
that man becomes worse than the first.

11:27. And it came to pass, as he spoke these things, a certain woman
from the crowd, lifting up her voice, said to him: Blessed is the womb
that bore thee and the paps that gave thee suck.

11:28. But he said: Yea rather, blessed are they who hear the word of
God and keep it.

11:29. And the multitudes running together, he began to say: This
generation is a wicked generation. It asketh a sign: and a sign shall
not be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet.

11:30. For as Jonas was a sign to the Ninivites; so shall the Son of man
also be to this generation.

11:31. The queen of the south shall rise in the judgment with the men of
this generation and shall condemn them: because she came from the ends
of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon. And behold more than Solomon
here.

11:32. The men of Ninive shall rise in the judgment with this generation
and shall condemn it; Because they did penance at the preaching of
Jonas. And behold more than Jonas here.

11:33. No man lighteth a candle and putteth it in a hidden place, nor
under a bushel: but upon a candlestick, that they that come in may see
the light.

11:34. The light of thy body is thy eye. If thy eye be single, thy whole
body will be lightsome: but if it be evil, thy body also will be
darksome.

11:35. Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not
darkness.

11:36. If then thy whole body be lightsome, having no part of darkness:
the whole shall be lightsome and, as a bright lamp, shall enlighten
thee.

11:37. And as he was speaking, a certain Pharisee prayed him that he
would dine with him. And he going in, sat down to eat.

11:38. And the Pharisee began to say, thinking within himself, why he
was not washed before dinner.

11:39. And the Lord said to him: Now you, Pharisees, make clean the
outside of the cup and of the platter: but your inside is full of rapine
and iniquity.

11:40. Ye fools, did not he that made that which is without make also
that which is within?

11:41. But yet that which remaineth, give alms: and behold, all things
are clean unto you.

11:42. But woe to you, Pharisees, because you tithe mint and rue and
every herb and pass over judgment and the charity of God.  Now these
things you ought to have done, and not to leave the other undone.

11:43. Woe to you, Pharisees, because you love the uppermost seats in
the synagogues and salutations in the marketplace.

11:44. Woe to you, because you are as sepulchres that appear not: and
men that walk over are not aware.

11:45. And one of the lawyers answering, saith to him: Master, in saying
these things, thou reproachest us also.

11:46. But he said: Woe to you lawyers also, because you load men with
burdens which they cannot bear and you yourselves touch not the packs
with one of your fingers.

Woe to you lawyers... He speaks of the doctors of the law of Moses,
commonly called the scribes.

11:47. Woe to you who build the monuments of the prophets: and your
fathers killed them.

Woe to you who build, etc... Not that the building of the monuments of
the prophets was in itself blameworthy, but only the intention of these
unhappy men, who made use of this outward shew of religion and piety, as
a means to carry on their wicked designs against the prince of prophets.

11:48. Truly you bear witness that you consent to the doings of your
fathers. For they indeed killed them: and you build their sepulchres.

11:49. For this cause also the wisdom of God said: I will send to them
prophets and apostles: and some of them they will kill and persecute.

11:50. That the blood of all the prophets which was shed from the
foundation of the world may be required of this generation,

11:51. From the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, who was slain
between the altar and the temple. Yea I say to you: It shall be required
of this generation.

11:52. Woe to you lawyers, for you have taken away the key of knowledge.
You yourselves have not entered in: and those that were entering in, you
have hindered.

11:53. And as he was saying these things to them, the Pharisees and the
lawyers began violently to urge him and to oppress his mouth about many
things,

11:54. Lying in wait for him and seeking to catch something from his
mouth, that they might accuse him.

Luke Chapter 12

Christ warns us against hypocrisy, the fear of the world and
covetousness. He admonishes all to watch.

12:1. And when great multitudes stood about him, so that they trod one
upon another, he began to say to his disciples: Beware ye of the leaven
of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.

12:2. For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed: nor
hidden that shall not be known.

12:3. For whatsoever things you have spoken in darkness shall be
published in the light: and that which you have spoken in the ear in the
chambers shall be preached on the housetops.

12:4. And I say to you, my friends: Be not afraid of them who kill the
body and after that have no more that they can do.

12:5. But I will shew you whom you shall fear: Fear ye him who, after he
hath killed, hath power to cast into hell. Yea, I say to you: Fear him.

12:6. Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them
is forgotten before God?

12:7. Yea, the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not
therefore: you are of more value than many sparrows.

12:8. And I say to you: Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall
the Son of man also confess before the angels of God.

12:9. But he that shall deny me before men shall be denied before the
angels of God.

12:10. And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be
forgiven him: but to him that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, it
shall not be forgiven.

12:11. And when they shall bring you into the synagogues and to
magistrates and powers, be not solicitous how or what you shall answer,
or what you shall say.

12:12. For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what you must
say.

12:13. And one of the multitude said to him: Master, speak to my brother
that he divide the inheritance with me.

12:14. But he said to him: Man, who hath appointed me judge or divider
over you?

12:15. And he said to them: Take heed and beware of all covetousness:
for a man's life doth not consist in the abundance of things which he
possesseth.

12:16. And he spoke a similitude to them, saying: The land of a certain
rich man brought forth plenty of fruits.

12:17. And he thought within himself, saying: What shall I do, because I
have no room where to bestow my fruits?

12:18. And he said: This will I do: I will pull down my barns and will
build greater: and into them will I gather all things that are grown to
me and my goods.

12:19. And I will say to my soul: Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for
many years. Take thy rest: eat, drink, make good cheer.

12:20. But God said to him: Thou fool, this night do they require thy
soul of thee. And whose shall those things be which thou hast provided?

12:21. So is he that layeth up treasure for himself and is not rich
towards God.

12:22. And he said to his disciples: Therefore I say to you: Be not
solicitous for your life, what you shall eat, nor for your body, what
you shall put on.

12:23. The life is more than the meat: and the body is more than the
raiment.

12:24. Consider the ravens, for they sow not, neither do they reap,
neither have they storehouse nor barn, and God feedeth them. How much
are you more valuable than they?

12:25. And which of you by taking thought can add to his stature one
cubit?

12:26. If then ye be not able to do so much as the least thing, why are
you solicitous for the rest?

12:27. Consider the lilies, how they grow: they labour not, neither do
they spin. But I say to you, not even Solomon in all his glory was
clothed like one of these.

12:28. Now, if God clothe in this manner the grass that is to-day in the
field and to-morrow is cast into the oven: how much more you, O ye of
little faith?

12:29. And seek not what you shall eat or what you shall drink: and be
not lifted up on high.

12:30. For all these things do the nations of the world seek. But your
Father knoweth that you have need of these things.

12:31. But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his justice: and all
these things shall be added unto you.

12:32. Fear not, little flock, for it hath pleased your Father to give
you a kingdom.

12:33. Sell what you possess and give alms. Make to yourselves bags
which grow not old, a treasure in heaven which faileth not: where no
thief approacheth, nor moth corrupteth.

12:34. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

12:35. Let your loins be girt and lamps burning in your hands.

12:36. And you yourselves like to men who wait for their lord, when he
shall return from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they
may open to him immediately.

12:37. Blessed are those servants whom the Lord, when he cometh, shall
find watching. Amen I say to you that he will gird himself and make them
sit down to meat and passing will minister unto them.

12:38. And if he shall come in the second watch or come in the third
watch and find them so, blessed are those servants.

12:39. But this know ye, that if the householder did know at what hour
the thief would come, he would surely watch and would not suffer his
house to be broken open.

12:40. Be you then also ready: for at what hour you think not the Son of
man will come.

12:41. And Peter said to him: Lord, dost thou speak this parable to us,
or likewise to all?

12:42. And the Lord said: Who thinkest thou is the faithful and wise
steward, whom his lord setteth over his family, to give them their
measure of wheat in due season?

12:43. Blessed is that servant whom, when his lord shall come, he shall
find so doing.

12:44. Verily I say to you, he will set him over all that he possesseth.

12:45. But if that servant shall say in his heart: My Lord is long a
coming; and shall begin to strike the men-servants and maid-servants,
and to eat and to drink and be drunk:

12:46. The lord of that servant will come in the day that he hopeth not,
and at the hour that he knoweth not: and shall separate him and shall
appoint him his portion with unbelievers.

12:47. And that servant, who knew the will of his lord and prepared not
himself and did not according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes.

12:48. But he that knew not and did things worthy of stripes shall be
beaten with few stripes. And unto whomsoever much is given, of him much
shall be required: and to whom they have committed much, of him they
will demand the more.

12:49. I am come to cast fire on the earth. And what will I, but that it
be kindled?

12:50. And I have a baptism wherewith I am to be baptized. And how am I
straitened until it be accomplished?

12:51. Think ye, that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, no;
but separation.

12:52. For there shall be from henceforth five in one house divided:
three against two, and two against three.

12:53. The father shall be divided against the son and the son against
his father: the mother against the daughter and the daughter against her
mother: the mother-in-law against the daughter-in-law and the daughter-
in-law against her mother-in-law.

12:54. And he said also to the multitudes: When you see a cloud rising
from the west, presently you say: A shower is coming.  And so it
happeneth.

12:55. And when ye see the south wind blow, you say: There will heat.
And it cometh to pass.

12:56. You hypocrites, you know how to discern the face of the heaven
and of the earth: but how is it that you do not discern this time?

12:57. And why, even of yourselves, do you not judge that which is just?

12:58. And when thou goest with thy adversary to the prince, whilst thou
art in the way, endeavour to be delivered from him: lest perhaps he draw
thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the exacter, and the
exacter cast thee into prison.

12:59. I say to thee, thou shalt not go out thence until thou pay the
very last mite.

Luke Chapter 13

The necessity of penance. The barren fig tree. The cure of the infirm
woman. The journey to Jerusalem.

13:1. And there were present, at that very time, some that told him of
the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.

13:2. And he answering, said to them: Think you that these Galileans
were sinners above all the men of Galilee, because they suffered such
things?

13:3. No, I say to you: but unless you shall do penance, you shall all
likewise perish.

13:4. Or those eighteen upon whom the tower fell in Siloe and slew them:
think you that they also were debtors above all the men that dwelt in
Jerusalem?

13:5. No, I say to you: but except you do penance, you shall all
likewise perish.

13:6. He spoke also this parable: A certain man had a fig tree planted
in his vineyard: and he came seeking fruit on it and found none.

13:7. And he said to the dresser of the vineyard: Behold, for these
three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree and I find none. Cut
it down therefore. Why cumbereth it the ground?

13:8. But he answering, said to him: Lord, let it alone this year also,
until I dig about it and dung it.

13:9. And if happily it bear fruit: but if not, then after that thou
shalt cut it down.

13:10. And he was teaching in their synagogue on their sabbath.

13:11. And behold there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity
eighteen years. And she was bowed together: neither could she look
upwards at all.

13:12. Whom when Jesus saw, he called her unto him and said to her:
Woman, thou art delivered from thy infirmity.

13:13. And he laid his hands upon her: and immediately she was made
straight and glorified God.

13:14. And the ruler of the synagogue being angry that Jesus had healed
on the sabbath answering, said to the multitude: Six days there are
wherein you ought to work. In them therefore come and be healed: and not
on the sabbath day.

13:15. And the Lord answering him, said: Ye hypocrites, doth not every
one of you, on the sabbath day, loose his ox or his ass from the manger
and lead them to water?

13:16. And ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound,
lo, these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day?

13:17. And when he said these things, all his adversaries were ashamed:
and all the people rejoiced for all the things that were gloriously done
by him.

13:18. He said therefore: To what is the kingdom of God like, and
whereunto shall I resemble it?

13:19. It is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and cast
into his garden: and it grew and became a great tree, and the birds of
the air lodged in the branches thereof.

13:20. And again he said: Whereunto shall I esteem the kingdom of God to
be like?

13:21. It is like to leaven, which a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.

13:22. And he went through the cities and towns teaching and making his
journey to Jerusalem.

13:23. And a certain man said to him: Lord, are they few that are saved?
But he said to them:

13:24. Strive to enter by the narrow gate: for many, I say to you, shall
seek to enter and shall not be able.

Shall seek, etc... Shall desire to be saved; but for want of taking
sufficient pains, and being thoroughly in earnest, shall not attain to
it.

13:25. But when the master of the house shall be gone in and shall shut
the door, you shall begin to stand without; and knock at the door,
saying: Lord, open to us. And he answering, shall say to you: I know you
not, whence you are.

13:26. Then you shall begin to say: We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence: and thou hast taught in our streets.

13:27. And he shall say to you: I know you not, whence you are.  Depart
from me, all ye workers of iniquity.

13:28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; when you shall see
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God:
and you yourselves thrust out.

13:29. And there shall come from the east and the west and the north and
the south: and shall sit down in the kingdom of God.

13:30. And behold, they are last that shall be first: and they are first
that shall be last.

13:31. The same day, there came some of the Pharisees, saying to him:
Depart, and get thee hence, for Herod hath a mind to kill thee.

13:32. And he said to them: Go and tell that fox: Behold, I cast out
devils and do cures, to-day and to-morrow, and the third day I am
consummated.

13:33. Nevertheless, I must walk to-day and to-morrow and the day
following, because it cannot be that a prophet perish, out of Jerusalem.

13:34. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the prophets; and stonest them
that are sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thy children as
the bird doth her brood under her wings, and thou wouldest not?

13:35. Behold your house shall be left to you desolate. And I say to you
that you shall not see me till the time come when you shall say: Blessed
is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.

Luke Chapter 14

Christ heals the dropsical man. The parable of the supper. The necessity
of renouncing all to follow Christ.

14:1. And it came to pass, when Jesus went into the house of one of the
Pharisees, on the sabbath day, that they watched him.

14:2. And behold, there was a certain man before him that had the
dropsy.

14:3. And Jesus answering, spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying:
Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day?

14:4. But they held their peace. But he taking him, healed him and sent
him away.

14:5. And answering them, he said: Which of you shall have an ass or an
ox fall into a pit and will not immediately draw him out, on the sabbath
day?

14:6. And they could not answer him to these things.

14:7. And he spoke a parable also to them that were invited, marking how
they chose the first seats at the table, saying to them:

14:8. When thou art invited to a wedding, sit not down in the first
place, lest perhaps one more honourable than thou be invited by him:

14:9. And he that invited thee and him, come and say to thee: Give this
man place. And then thou begin with shame to take the lowest place.

14:10. But when thou art invited, go, sit down in the lowest place; that
when he who invited thee cometh, he may say to thee: Friend, go up
higher. Then shalt thou have glory before them that sit at table with
thee.

14:11. Because every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled: and he
that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

14:12. And he said to him also that had invited him: When thou makest a
dinner or a supper, call not thy friends nor thy brethren nor thy
kinsmen nor thy neighbours who are rich; lest perhaps they also invite
thee again, and a recompense be made to thee.

14:13. But when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame
and the blind.

14:14. And thou shalt be blessed, because they have not wherewith to
make thee recompense: for recompense shall be made thee at the
resurrection of the just.

14:15. When one of them that sat at table with him had heard these
things, he said to him: Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the
kingdom of God.

14:16. But he said to him: A certain man made a great supper and invited
many.

14:17. And he sent his servant at the hour of supper to say to them that
were invited, that they should come: for now all things are ready.

14:18. And they began all at once to make excuse. The first said to him:
I have bought a farm and I must needs go out and see it. I pray thee,
hold me excused.

14:19. And another said: I have bought five yoke of oxen and I go to try
them. I pray thee, hold me excused.

14:20. And another said: I have married a wife; and therefore I cannot
come.

14:21. And the servant returning, told these things to his lord.  Then
the master of the house, being angry, said to his servant: Go out
quickly into the streets and lanes of the city; and bring in hither the
poor and the feeble and the blind and the lame.

14:22. And the servant said: Lord, it is done as thou hast commanded;
and yet there is room.

14:23. And the Lord said to the servant: Go out into the highways and
hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.

14:24. But I say unto you that none of those men that were invited shall
taste of my supper.

14:25. And there went great multitudes with him. And turning, he said to
them:

14:26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother and
wife and children and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life also,
he cannot be my disciple.

Hate not, etc... The law of Christ does not allow us to hate even our
enemies, much less our parents: but the meaning of the text is, that we
must be in that disposition of soul, as to be willing to renounce, and
part with every thing, how near or dear soever it may be to us, that
would keep us from following Christ.

14:27. And whosoever doth not carry his cross and come after me cannot
be my disciple.

14:28. For which of you, having a mind to build a tower, doth not first
sit down and reckon the charges that are necessary, whether he have
wherewithal to finish it:

14:29. Lest, after he hath laid the foundation and is not able to finish
it, all that see it begin to mock him,

14:30. Saying: This man began to build and was not able to finish.

14:31. Or, what king, about to go to make war against another king, doth
not first sit down and think whether he be able, with ten thousand, to
meet him that, with twenty thousand, cometh against him?

14:32. Or else, while the other is yet afar off, sending an embassy, he
desireth conditions of peace.

14:33. So likewise every one of you that doth not renounce all that he
possesseth cannot be my disciple.

14:34. Salt is good. But if the salt shall lose its savour, wherewith
shall it be seasoned?

14:35. It is neither profitable for the land nor for the dunghill: but
shall be cast out. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

Luke Chapter 15

The parables of the lost sheep and of the prodigal son.

15:1. Now the publicans and sinners drew near unto him to hear him.

15:2. And the Pharisees and the scribes murmured, saying: This man
receiveth sinners and eateth with them.

15:3. And he spoke to them this parable, saying:

15:4. What man of you that hath an hundred sheep, and if he shall lose
one of them, doth he not leave the ninety-nine in the desert and go
after that which was lost, until he find it?

15:5. And when he hath found it, lay it upon his shoulders, rejoicing?

15:6. And coming home, call together his friends and neighbours, saying
to them: Rejoice with me, because I have found my sheep that was lost?

15:7. I say to you that even so there shall be joy in heaven upon one
sinner that doth penance, more than upon ninety-nine just who need not
penance.

15:8. Or what woman having ten groats, if she lose one groat, doth not
light a candle and sweep the house and seek diligently until she find
it?

15:9. And when she hath found it, call together her friends and
neighbours, saying: Rejoice with me, because I have found the groat
which I had lost.

15:10. So I say to you, there shall be joy before the angels of God upon
one sinner doing penance.

Before the angels... By this it is plain that the spirits in heaven have
a concern for us below, and a joy at our repentance and consequently a
knowledge of it.

15:11. And he said: A certain man had two sons.

15:12. And the younger of them said to his father: Father, give me the
portion of substance that falleth to me. And he divided unto them his
substance.

15:13. And not many days after, the younger son, gathering all together,
went abroad into a far country: and there wasted his substance, living
riotously.

15:14. And after he had spent all, there came a mighty famine in that
country: and he began to be in want.

15:15. And he went and cleaved to one of the citizens of that country.
And he sent him into his farm to feed swine.

15:16. And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks the swine
did eat: and no man gave unto him.

15:17. And returning to himself, he said: How many hired servants in my
father's house abound with bread, and I here perish with hunger!

15:18. I will arise and will go to my father and say to him: Father, I
have sinned against heaven and before thee.

15:19. I am not worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired
servants.

15:20. And rising up, he came to his father. And when he was yet a great
way off, his father saw him and was moved with compassion and running to
him fell upon his neck and kissed him.

15:21. And the son said to him: Father: I have sinned against heaven and
before thee I am not now worthy to be called thy son.

15:22. And the father said to his servants: Bring forth quickly the
first robe and put it on him: and put a ring on his hand and shoes on
his feet.

15:23. And bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it: and let us eat and
make merry:

15:24. Because this my son was dead and is come to life again, was lost
and is found. And they began to be merry.

15:25. Now his elder son was in the field and when he came and drew nigh
to the house, he heard music and dancing.

15:26. And he called one of the servants, and asked what these things
meant.

15:27. And he said to him: Thy brother is come and thy father hath
killed the fatted calf, because he hath received him safe.

15:28. And he was angry and would not go in. His father therefore coming
out began to entreat him.

15:29. And he answering, said to his father: Behold, for so many years
do I serve thee and I have never transgressed thy commandment: and yet
thou hast never given me a kid to make merry with my friends.

15:30. But as soon as this thy son is come, who hath devoured his
substance with harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted calf.

15:31. But he said to him: Son, thou art always with me; and all I have
is thine.

15:32. But it was fit that we should make merry and be glad: for this
thy brother was dead and is come to life again; he was lost, and is
found.

Luke Chapter 16

The parable of the unjust steward and of the rich man and Lazarus.

16:1. And he said also to his disciples: There was a certain rich man
who had a steward: and the same was accused unto him, that he had wasted
his goods.

16:2. And he called him and said to him: How is it that I hear this of
thee? Give an account of thy stewardship: for now thou canst be steward
no longer.

16:3. And the steward said within himself: What shall I do, because my
lord taketh away from me the stewardship? To dig I am not able; to beg I
am ashamed.

16:4. I know what I will do, that when I shall be removed from the
stewardship, they may receive me into their houses.

16:5. Therefore, calling together every one of his lord's debtors, he
said to the first: How much dost thou owe my lord?

16:6. But he said: An hundred barrels of oil. And he said to him: Take
thy bill and sit down quickly and write fifty.

16:7. Then he said to another: And how much dost thou owe? Who said: An
hundred quarters of wheat. He said to him: Take thy bill and write
eighty.

16:8. And the lord commended the unjust steward, forasmuch as he had
done wisely: for the children of this world are wiser in their
generation than the children of light.

16:9. And I say to you: Make unto you friends of the mammon of iniquity:
that when you shall fail, they may receive you into everlasting
dwellings.

Mammon of iniquity... Mammon signifies riches. They are here called the
mammon of iniquity, because oftentimes ill gotten, ill bestowed, or an
occasion of evil; and at the best are but worldly, and false; and not
the true riches of a Christian.  They may receive... By this we see,
that the poor servants of God, whom we have relieved by our alms, may
hereafter, by their intercession, bring our souls to heaven.

16:10. He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in
that which is greater: and he that is unjust in that which is little is
unjust also in that which is greater.

16:11. If then you have not been faithful in the unjust mammon, who will
trust you with that which is the true?

16:12. And if you have not been faithful in that which is another's, who
will give you that which is your own?

16:13. No servant can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one
and love the other: or he will hold to the one and despise the other.
You cannot serve God and mammon.

16:14. Now the Pharisees, who were covetous, heard all these things: and
they derided him.

16:15. And he said to them: you are they who justify yourselves before
men, but God knoweth your hearts. For that which is high to men is an
abomination before God.

16:16. The law and the prophets were until John. From that time the
kingdom of God is preached: and every one useth violence towards it.

16:17. And it is easier for heaven and earth to pass than one tittle of
the law to fall.

16:18. Every one that putteth away his wife and marrieth another
committeth adultery: and he that marrieth her that is put away from her
husband committeth adultery.

16:19. There was a certain rich man who was clothed in purple and fine
linen and feasted sumptuously every day.

16:20. And there was a certain beggar, named Lazarus, who lay at his
gate, full of sores,

16:21. Desiring to be filled with the crumbs that fell from the rich
man's table. And no one did give him: moreover the dogs came and licked
his sores.

16:22. And it came to pass that the beggar died and was carried by the
angels into Abraham's bosom. And the rich man also died: and he was
buried in hell.

Abraham's bosom... The place of rest, where the souls of the saints
resided, till Christ had opened heaven by his death.

16:23. And lifting up his eyes when he was in torments, he saw Abraham
afar off and Lazarus in his bosom:

16:24. And he cried and said: Father Abraham, have mercy on me and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water to cool my
tongue: for I am tormented in this flame.

16:25. And Abraham said to him: Son, remember that thou didst receive
good things in thy lifetime, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now
he is comforted and thou art tormented.

16:26. And besides all this, between us and you, there is fixed a great
chaos: so that they who would pass from hence to you cannot, nor from
thence come hither.

16:27. And he said: Then, father, I beseech thee that thou wouldst send
him to my father's house, for I have five brethren,

16:28. That he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this
place of torments.

16:29. And Abraham said to him: They have Moses and the prophets.  Let
them hear them.

16:30. But he said: No, father Abraham: but if one went to them from the
dead, they will do penance.

16:31. And he said to him: If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
neither will they believe, if one rise again from the dead.

Luke Chapter 17

Lessons of avoiding scandal and of the efficacy of faith. The ten
lepers. The manner of the coming of Christ.

17:1. And he said to his disciples: It is impossible that scandals
should not come. But woe to him through whom they come!

17:2. It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck
and he cast into the sea, than that he should scandalize one of these
little ones.

17:3. Take heed to yourselves. If thy brother sin against thee, reprove
him: and if he do penance, forgive him.

17:4. And if he sin against thee seven times in a day, and seven times
in a day be converted unto thee, saying: I repent: forgive him.

17:5. And the apostles said to the Lord: Increase our faith.

17:6. And the Lord said: If you had faith like to a grain of mustard
seed, you might say to this mulberry tree: Be thou rooted up and be thou
transplanted into the sea. And it would obey you.

17:7. But which of you, having a servant ploughing or feeding cattle,
will say to him, when he is come from the field: Immediately go. Sit
down to meat.

17:8. And will not rather say to him: Make ready my supper and gird
thyself and serve me, whilst I eat and drink; and afterwards thou shalt
eat and drink?

17:9. Doth he thank that servant for doing the things which he commanded
him?

17:10. I think not. So you also, when you shall have done all these
things that are commanded you, say: We are unprofitable servants; we
have done that which we ought to do.

Unprofitable servants... Because our service is of no profit to our
master; and he justly claims it as our bounden duty. But though we are
unprofitable to him, our serving him is not unprofitable to us; for he
is pleased to give by his grace a value to our good works, which, in
consequence of his promise, entitles them to an eternal reward.

17:11. And it came to pass, as he was going to Jerusalem, he passed
through the midst of Samaria and Galilee.

17:12. And as he entered into a certain town, there met him ten men that
were lepers, who stood afar off.

17:13. And lifted up their voice, saying: Jesus, Master, have mercy on
us.

17:14. Whom when he saw, he said: Go, shew yourselves to the priests.
And it came to pass, as they went, they were made clean.

17:15. And one of them, when he saw that he was made clean, went back,
with a loud voice glorifying God.

17:16. And he fell on his face before his feet, giving thanks.  And this
was a Samaritan.

17:17. And Jesus answering, said: Were not ten made clean? And where are
the nine?

17:18. There is no one found to return and give glory to God, but this
stranger.

17:19. And he said to him: Arise, go thy way; for thy faith hath made
thee whole.

17:20. And being asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God should
come, he answering them and said: The kingdom of God cometh not with
observation.

17:21. Neither shall they say: Behold here, or behold there. For lo, the
kingdom of God is within you.

17:22. And he said to his disciples: The days will come when you shall
desire to see one day of the Son of man. And you shall not see it.

17:23. And they will say to you: See here, and see there. Go ye not
after, nor follow them.

17:24. For as the lightning that lighteneth from under heaven shineth
unto the parts that are under heaven, so shall the Son of man be in his
day.

17:25. But first he must suffer many things and be rejected by this
generation.

17:26. And as it came to pass in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in
the days of the Son of man.

17:27. They did eat and drink, they married wives and were given in
marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark and the flood came
and destroyed them all.

17:28. Likewise as it came to pass in the days of Lot. They did eat and
drink, they bought and sold, they planted and built.

17:29. And in the day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and
brimstone from heaven and destroyed them all.

17:30. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man shall be
revealed.

17:31. In that hour, he that shall be on the housetop, and his goods in
the house, let him not go down to take them away: and he that shall be
in the field, in like manner, let him not return back.

17:32. Remember Lot's wife.

17:33. Whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it: and
whosoever shall lose it shall preserve it.

17:34. I say to you: In that night there shall be two men in one bed.
The one shall be taken and the other shall be left.

17:35. Two women shall be grinding together. The one shall be taken and
the other shall be left. Two men shall be in the field. The one shall be
taken and the other shall be left.

17:36. They answering, say to him: Where, Lord?

17:37. Who said to them: Wheresoever the body shall be, thither will the
eagles also be gathered together.

Luke Chapter 18

We must pray always. The Pharisee and the publican. The danger of
riches. The blind man is restored to sight.

18:1. And he spoke also a parable to them, that we ought always to pray
and not to faint,

18:2. Saying: There was a judge in a certain city, who feared not God
nor regarded man.

18:3. And there was a certain widow in that city; and she came to him,
saying: Avenge me of my adversary.

Avenge... That is, do me justice. It is a Hebraism.

18:4. And he would not for a long time. But afterwards he said within
himself: Although I fear not God nor regard man,

18:5. Yet because this widow is troublesome to me, I will avenge her,
lest continually coming she weary me.

18:6. And the Lord said: Hear what the unjust judge saith.

18:7. And will not God revenge his elect who cry to him day and night?
And will he have patience in their regard?

18:8. I say to you that he will quickly revenge them. But yet the Son of
man, when he cometh, shall he find, think you, faith on earth?

18:9. And to some who trusted in themselves as just and despised others,
he spoke also this parable:

18:10. Two men went up into the temple to pray: the one a Pharisee and
the other a publican.

18:11. The Pharisee standing, prayed thus with himself: O God, I give
thee thanks that I am not as the rest of men, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, as also is this publican.

18:12. I fast twice in a week: I give tithes of all that I possess.

18:13. And the publican, standing afar off, would not so much as lift up
his eyes towards heaven; but struck his breast, saying: O God, be
merciful to me a sinner.

18:14. I say to you, this man went down into his house justified rather
than the other: because every one that exalteth himself shall be
humbled: and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

18:15. And they brought unto him also infants, that he might touch them.
Which when the disciples saw, they rebuked them.

18:16. But Jesus, calling them together, said: Suffer children to come
to me and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God.

18:17. Amen, I say to you: Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of
God as a child shall not enter into it.

18:18. And a certain ruler asked him, saying: Good master, what shall I
do to possess everlasting life?

18:19. And Jesus said to him: Why dost thou call me good? None is good
but God alone.

18:20. Thou knowest the commandments: Thou shalt not kill. Thou shalt
not commit adultery: Thou shalt not steal: Thou shalt not bear false
witness: Honour thy father and mother.

18:21. Who said: All these things have I kept from my youth.

18:22. Which when Jesus had heard, he said to him: Yet one thing is
wanting to thee. Sell all whatever thou hast and give to the poor: and
thou shalt have treasure in heaven. And come, follow me.

18:23. He having heard these things, became sorrowful: for he was very
rich.

18:24. And Jesus seeing him become sorrowful, said: How hardly shall
they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God.

18:25. For it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

18:26. And they that heard it said: Who then can be saved?

18:27. He said to them: The things that are impossible with men are
possible with God.

18:28. Then Peter said: Behold, we have left all things and have
followed thee.

18:29. Who said to them: Amen, I say to you, there is no man that hath
left home or parents or brethren or wife or children, for the kingdom of
God's sake,

18:30. Who shall not receive much more in this present time, and in the
world to come life everlasting.

18:31. Then Jesus took unto him the twelve and said to them: Behold, we
go up to Jerusalem; and all things shall be accomplished which were
written by the prophets concerning the Son of man.

18:32. For he shall be delivered to the Gentiles and shall be mocked and
scourged and spit upon.

18:33. And after they have scourged him, they will put him to death. And
the third day he shall rise again.

18:34. And they understood none of these things, and this word was hid
from them: and they understood not the things that were said.

18:35. Now it came to pass, when he drew nigh to Jericho, that a certain
blind man sat by the way side, begging.

18:36. And when he heard the multitude passing by, he asked what this
meant.

18:37. And they told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by.

18:38. And he cried out, saying: Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me.

18:39. And they that went before rebuked him, that he should hold his
peace: but he cried out much more: Son of David, have mercy on me.

18:40. And Jesus standing, commanded him to be brought unto him.  And
when he was come near, he asked him,

18:41. Saying; What wilt thou that I do to thee? But he said: Lord, that
I may see.

18:42. And Jesus said to him: Receive thy sight: thy faith hath made
thee whole.

18:43. And immediately he saw and followed him, glorifying God.  And all
the people, when they saw it, gave praise to God.

Luke Chapter 19

Zacheus entertains Christ. The parable of the pounds. Christ rides upon
an ass and weeps over Jerusalem.

19:1. And entering he walked through Jericho.

19:2. And behold, there was a man named Zacheus, who was the chief of
the publicans: and he was rich.

19:3. And he sought to see Jesus who he was: and he could not for the
crowd, because he was low of stature.

19:4. And running before, he climbed up into a sycamore tree, that he
might see him: for he was to pass that way.

19:5. And when Jesus was come to the place, looking up, he saw him and
said to him: Zacheus, make haste and come down: for this day I must
abide in thy house.

19:6. And he made haste and came down and received him with joy.

19:7. And when all saw it, they murmured, saying, that he was gone to be
a guest with a man that was a sinner.

19:8. But Zacheus standing, said to the Lord: Behold, Lord, the half of
my goods I give to the poor; and if I have wronged any man of any thing,
I restore him fourfold.

19:9. Jesus said to him: This day is salvation come to this house,
because he also is a son of Abraham.

19:10. For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was
lost.

19:11. As they were hearing these things, he added and spoke a parable,
because he was nigh to Jerusalem and because they thought that the
kingdom of God should immediately be manifested.

19:12. He said therefore: a certain nobleman went into a far country, to
receive for himself a kingdom and to return.

19:13. And calling his ten servants, he gave them ten pounds and said to
them: Trade till I come.

He gave them ten pounds... In the original, what is here translated a
pound, is in Latin, mina, in value of our coin, three pounds two
shillings and sixpence.

19:14. But his citizens hated him and they sent an embassage after him,
saying: We will not have this man to reign over us.

19:15. And it came to pass that he returned, having received the
kingdom: and he commanded his servants to be called, to whom he had
given the money, that he might know how much every man had gained by
trading,

19:16. And the first came saying: Lord, thy pound hath gained ten
pounds.

19:17. And he said to him: Well done, thou good servant, because thou
hast been faithful in a little, thou shalt have power over ten cities.

19:18. And the second came, saying: Lord, thy pound hath gained five
pounds.

19:19. And he said to him: Be thou also over five cities.

19:20. And another came, saying: Lord, behold here is thy pound, which I
have kept laid up in a napkin.

19:21. For I feared thee, because thou art an austere man: thou takest
up what thou didst not lay down: and thou reapest that which thou didst
not sow.

19:22. He saith to him: Out of thy own mouth I judge thee, thou wicked
servant. Thou knewest that I was an austere man, taking up what I laid
not down and reaping that which I did not sow.

19:23. And why then didst thou not give my money into the bank, that at
my coming I might have exacted it with usury?

19:24. And he said to them that stood by: Take the pound away from him
and give it to him that hath ten pounds.

19:25. And they said to him: Lord, he hath ten pounds.

19:26. But I say to you that to every one that hath shall be given, and
he shall abound: and from him that hath not, even that which he hath
shall be taken from him.

19:27. But as for those my enemies, who would not have me reign over
them, bring them hither and kill them before me.

19:28. And having said these things, he went before, going up to
Jerusalem.

19:29. And it came to pass, when he was come nigh to Bethphage and
Bethania, unto the mount called Olivet, he sent two of his disciples,

19:30. Saying: Go into the town which is over against you, at your
entering into which you shall find the colt of an ass tied, on which no
man ever hath sitten: loose him and bring him hither.

19:31. And if any man shall ask you: Why do you loose him? You shall say
thus unto him: Because the Lord hath need of his service.

19:32. And they that were sent went their way and found the colt
standing, as he said unto them.

19:33. And as they were loosing the colt, the owners thereof said to
them: Why loose you the colt?

19:34. But they said: Because the Lord hath need of him.

19:35. And they brought him to Jesus. And casting their garments on the
colt, they set Jesus thereon.

19:36. And as he went, they spread their clothes underneath in the way.

19:37. And when he was now coming near the descent of Mount Olivet, the
whole multitude of his disciples began with joy to praise God with a
loud voice, for all the mighty works they had seen,

19:38. Saying: Blessed be the king who cometh in the name of the Lord!
Peace in heaven and glory on high!

19:39. And some of the Pharisees, from amongst the multitude, said to
him: Master, rebuke thy disciples.

19:40. To whom he said: I say to you that if these shall hold their
peace, the stones will cry out.

19:41. And when he drew near, seeing the city, he wept over it, saying:

19:42. If thou also hadst known, and that in this thy day, the things
that are to thy peace: but now they are hidden from thy eyes.

19:43. For the days shall come upon thee: and thy enemies shall cast a
trench about thee and compass thee round and straiten thee on every
side,

19:44. And beat thee flat to the ground, and thy children who are in
thee. And they shall not leave in thee a stone upon a stone: because
thou hast not known the time of thy visitation.

19:45. And entering into the temple, he began to cast out them that sold
therein and them that bought.

19:46. Saying to them: It is written: My house is the house of prayer.
But you have made it a den of thieves.

19:47. And he was teaching daily in the temple. And the chief priests
and the scribes and the rulers of the people sought to destroy him.

19:48. And they found not what to do to him: for all the people were
very attentive to hear him.

Luke Chapter 20

The parable of the husbandmen. Of paying tribute to Caesar and of the
resurrection of the dead.

20:1. And it came to pass that on one of the days, as he was teaching
the people in the temple and preaching the gospel, the chief priests and
the scribes, with the ancients, met together,

20:2. And spoke to him, saying: Tell us, by what authority dost thou
these things? Or, who is he that hath given thee this authority?

20:3. And Jesus answering, said to them: I will also ask you one thing.
Answer me:

20:4. The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men?

20:5. But they thought within themselves, saying: If we shall say, From
heaven: he will say: Why then did you not believe in him?

20:6. But if we say, of men: the whole people will stone us. For they
are persuaded that John was a prophet.

20:7. And they answered that they knew not whence it was.

20:8. And Jesus said to them: Neither do I tell you by what authority I
do these things.

20:9. And he began to speak to the people this parable: A certain man
planted a vineyard and let it out to husbandmen: and he was abroad for a
long time.

20:10. And at the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen, that they
should give him of the fruit of the vineyard. Who, beating him, sent him
away empty.

20:11. And again he sent another servant. But they beat him also and,
treating him reproachfully, sent him away empty.

20:12. And again he sent the third: and they wounded him also and cast
him out.

20:13. Then the lord of the vineyard said: What shall I do? I will send
my beloved son. It may be, when they see him, they will reverence him.

20:14. Whom, when the husbandmen saw, they thought within themselves,
saying: This is the heir. Let us kill him, that the inheritance may be
ours.

20:15. So casting him out of the vineyard, they killed him. What
therefore will the lord of the vineyard do to them?

20:16. He will come and will destroy these husbandmen and will give the
vineyard to others. Which they hearing, said to him: God forbid.

20:17. But he looking on them, said: What is this then that is written,
The stone, which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of
the corner?

20:18. Whosoever shall fall upon that stone shall be bruised: and upon
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

20:19. And the chief priests and the scribes sought to lay hands on him
the same hour: but they feared the people, for they knew that he spoke
this parable to them.

20:20. And being upon the watch, they sent spies, who should feign
themselves just, that they might take hold of him in his words, that
they might deliver him up to the authority and power of the governor.

20:21. And they asked him, saying: Master, we know that thou speakest
and teachest rightly: and thou dost not respect any person, but teachest
the way of God in truth.

20:22. Is it lawful for us to give tribute to Caesar, or no?

20:23. But he, considering their guile, said to them: Why tempt you me?

20:24. Shew me a penny. Whose image and inscription hath it? They
answering, said to him: Caesar's.

20:25. And he said to them: Render therefore to Caesar the things, that
are Caesar's: and to God the things that are God's.

20:26. And they could not reprehend his word before the people: and
wondering at his answer, they held their peace.

20:27. And there came to him some of the Sadducees, who deny that there
is any resurrection: and they asked him,

20:28. Saying: Master, Moses wrote unto us: If any man's brother die,
having a wife, and he leave no children, that his brother should take
her to wife and raise up seed unto his brother.

20:29. There were therefore seven brethren: and the first took a wife
and died without children.

20:30. And the next took her to wife: and he also died childless.

20:31. And the third took her. And in like manner, all the seven: and
they left no children and died.

20:32. Last of all the woman died also.

20:33. In the resurrection therefore, whose wife of them shall she be?
For all the seven had her to wife.

20:34. And Jesus said to them: The children of this world marry and are
given in marriage:

20:35. But they that shall be accounted worthy of that world and of the
resurrection from the dead shall neither be married nor take wives.

20:36. Neither can they die any more for they are equal to the angels
and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection.

20:37. Now that the dead rise again, Moses also shewed at the bush, when
he called the Lord: The God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God
of Jacob.

20:38. For he is not the God of the dead, but of the living: for all
live to him.

20:39. And some of the scribes answering, said to him: Master, thou hast
said well.

20:40. And after that they durst not ask him any more questions.

20:41. But he said to them: How say they that Christ is the son of
David?

20:42. And David himself saith in the book of Psalms: The Lord said to
my Lord, sit thou on my right hand,

20:43. Till I make thy enemies thy footstool.

20:44. David then calleth him Lord. And how is he his son?

20:45. And in the hearing of all the people, he said to his disciples:

20:46. Beware of the scribes, who desire to walk in long robes and love
salutations in the market place and the first chairs in the synagogues
and the chief rooms at feasts:

20:47. Who devour the houses of widows, feigning long prayer. These
shall receive greater damnation.

Luke Chapter 21

The widow's mites. The signs that should forerun the destruction of
Jerusalem and the end of the world.

21:1. And looking on, he saw the rich men cast their gifts into the
treasury.

21:2. And he saw also a certain poor widow casting in two brass mites.

21:3. And he said: Verily, I say to you that this poor widow hath cast
in more than they all.

21:4. For all these have of their abundance cast into the offerings of
God: but she of her want hath cast in all the living that she had.

21:5. And some saying of the temple that it was adorned with goodly
stones and gifts, he said:

21:6. These things which you see, the days will come in which there
shall not be left a stone upon a stone that shall not be thrown down.

21:7. And they asked him, saying: Master, when shall these things be?
And what shall be the sign when they shall begin to come to pass?

21:8. Who said: Take heed you be not seduced: for many will come in my
name, saying: I am he and the time is at hand. Go ye not therefore after
them.

21:9. And when you shall hear of wars and seditions, be not terrified.
These things must first come to pass: but the end is not yet presently.

21:10. Then he said to them: Nation shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom.

21:11. And there shall be great earthquakes in divers places and
pestilences and famines and terrors from heaven: and there shall be
great signs.

21:12. But before all these things, they will lay their hands on you and
persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues and into prisons,
dragging you before kings and governors, for my name's sake.

21:13. And it shall happen unto you for a testimony.

21:14. Lay it up therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before how
you shall answer:

21:15. For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your
adversaries shall not be able to resist and gainsay.

21:16. And you shall be betrayed by your parents and brethren and
kinsmen and friends: and some of you they will put to death.

21:17. And you shall be hated by all men for my name's sake.

21:18. But a hair of your head shall not perish.

21:19. In your patience you shall possess your souls.

21:20. And when you shall see Jerusalem compassed about with an army,
then know that the desolation thereof is at hand.

21:21. Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains: and those
who are in the midst thereof depart out: and those who are in the
countries not enter into it.

21:22. For these are the days of vengeance, that all things may be
fulfilled, that are written.

21:23. But woe to them that are with child and give suck in those days:
for there shall be great distress in the land and wrath upon this
people.

21:24. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword and shall be led
away captives into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down by
the Gentiles till the times of the nations be fulfilled.

21:25. And there shall be signs in the sun and in the moon and in the
stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, by reason of the
confusion of the roaring of the sea, and of the waves:

21:26. Men withering away for fear and expectation of what shall come
upon the whole world. For the powers of heaven shall be moved.

21:27. And then they shall see the Son of man coming in a cloud, with
great power and majesty.

21:28. But when these things begin to come to pass, look up and lift up
your heads, because your redemption is at hand.

21:29. And he spoke to them a similitude. See the fig tree and all the
trees:

21:30. When they now shoot forth their fruit, you know that summer is
nigh;

21:31. So you also, when you shall see these things come to pass, know
that the kingdom of God is at hand.

21:32. Amen, I say to you, this generation shall not pass away till all
things be fulfilled.

21:33. Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass
away.

21:34. And take heed to yourselves, lest perhaps your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness and the cares of this life:
and that day come upon you suddenly.

21:35. For as a snare shall it come upon all that sit upon the face of
the whole earth.

21:36. Watch ye, therefore, praying at all times, that you may be
accounted worthy to escape all these things that are to come and to
stand before the Son of man.

21:37. And in the daytime, he was teaching in the temple: but at night
going out, he abode in the mount that is called Olivet.

21:38. And all the people came early in the morning to him in the
temple, to hear him.

Luke Chapter 22

The treason of Judas. The last supper. The first part of the history of
the passion.

22:1. Now the feast of unleavened bread, which is called the pasch, was
at hand.

22:2. And the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might put
Jesus to death: but they feared the people.

22:3. And Satan entered into Judas, who was surnamed Iscariot, one of
the twelve.

22:4. And he went and discoursed with the chief priests and the
magistrates, how he might betray him to them.

22:5. And they were glad and covenanted to give him money.

22:6. And he promised. And he sought opportunity to betray him in the
absence of the multitude.

22:7. And the day of the unleavened bread came, on which it was
necessary that the pasch should be killed.

22:8. And he sent Peter and John, saying: Go, and prepare for us the
pasch, that we may eat.

22:9. But they said: Where wilt thou that we prepare?

22:10. And he said to them: Behold, as you go into the city, there shall
meet you a man carrying a pitcher of water: follow him into the house
where he entereth in.

22:11. And you shall say to the goodman of the house: The master saith
to thee: Where is the guest chamber, where I may eat the pasch with my
disciples?

22:12. And he will shew you a large dining room, furnished. And there
prepare.

22:13. And they going, found as he had said to them and made ready the
pasch.

22:14. And when the hour was come, he sat down: and the twelve apostles
with him.

22:15. And he said to them: With desire I have desired to eat this pasch
with you, before I suffer.

22:16. For I say to you that from this time I will not eat it, till it
be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.

22:17. And having taken the chalice, he gave thanks and said: Take and
divide it among you.

22:18. For I say to you that I will not drink of the fruit of the vine,
till the kingdom of God come.

22:19. And taking bread, he gave thanks and brake and gave to them,
saying: This is my body, which is given for you. Do this for a
commemoration of me.

Do this for a commemoration of me... This sacrifice and sacrament is to
be continued in the church, to the end of the world, to shew forth the
death of Christ, until he cometh. But this commemoration, or
remembrance, is by no means inconsistent with the real presence of his
body and blood, under these sacramental veils, which represent his
death; on the contrary, it is the manner that he himself hath commanded,
of commemorating and celebrating his death, by offering in sacrifice,
and receiving in the sacrament, that body and blood by which we were
redeemed.

22:20. In like manner, the chalice also, after he had supped, saying:
This is the chalice, the new testament in my blood, which shall be shed
for you.

22:21. But yet behold: the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on
the table.

22:22. And the Son of man indeed goeth, according to that which is
determined: but yet, woe to that man by whom he shall be betrayed.

22:23. And they began to inquire among themselves, which of them it was
that should do this thing.

22:24. And there was also a strife amongst them, which of them should
seem to be the greater.

22:25. And he said to them: The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them;
and they that have power over them are called beneficent.

22:26. But you not so: but he that is the greater among you, let him
become as the younger: and he that is the leader, as he that serveth.

22:27. For which is greater, he that sitteth at table or he that
serveth? Is not he that sitteth at table? But I am in the midst of you,
as he that serveth.

22:28. And you are they who have continued with me in my temptations:

22:29. And I dispose to you, as my Father hath disposed to me, a
kingdom;

22:30. That you may eat and drink at my table, in my kingdom: and may
sit upon thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

22:31. And the Lord said: Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired to
have you, that he may sift you as wheat.

22:32. But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and thou,
being once converted, confirm thy brethren.

22:33. Who said to him: Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both into
prison and to death.

22:34. And he said: I say to thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this
day, till thou thrice deniest that thou knowest me. And he said to them:

22:35. When I sent you without purse and scrip and shoes, did you want
anything?

22:36. But they said: Nothing. Then said he unto them: But now he that
hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise a scrip: and he that hath
not, let him sell his coat and buy a sword.

22:37. For I say to you that this that is written must yet be fulfilled
in me. And with the wicked was he reckoned. For the things concerning me
have an end.

22:38. But they said: Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said to
them: It is enough.

22:39. And going out, he went, according to his custom, to the Mount of
Olives. And his disciples also followed him.

22:40. And when he was come to the place, he said to them: Pray, lest ye
enter into temptation.

22:41. And he was withdrawn away from them a stone's cast. And kneeling
down, he prayed.

22:42. Saying: Father, if thou wilt, remove this chalice from me: but
yet not my will, but thine be done.

22:43. And there appeared to him an angel from heaven, strengthening
him. And being in an agony, he prayed the longer.

22:44. And his sweat became as drops of blood, trickling down upon the
ground.

22:45. And when he rose up from prayer and was come to the disciples, he
found them sleeping for sorrow.

22:46. And he said to them: Why sleep you? Arise: pray: lest you enter
into temptation.

22:47. As he was yet speaking, behold a multitude; and he that was
called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them and drew near to
Jesus, for to kiss him.

22:48. And Jesus said to him: Judas, dost thou betray the Son of man
with a kiss?

22:49. And they that were about him, seeing what would follow, said to
him: Lord, shall we strike with the sword?

22:50. And one of them struck the servant of the high priest and cut off
his right ear.

22:51. But Jesus answering, said: Suffer ye thus far. And when he had
touched his ear, he healed him.

22:52. And Jesus said to the chief priests and magistrates of the temple
and the ancients, that were come unto him: Are ye come out, as it were
against a thief, with swords and clubs?

22:53. When I was daily with you in the temple, you did not stretch
forth your hands against me: but this is your hour and the power of
darkness.

22:54. And apprehending him, they led him to the high priest's house.
But Peter followed afar off.

22:55. And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall and
were sitting about it, Peter was in the midst of them.

22:56. Whom when a certain servant maid had seen sitting at the light
and had earnestly beheld him, she said: This man also was with him.

22:57. But he denied him, saying: Woman, I know him not.

22:58. And after a little while, another seeing him, said: Thou also art
one of them. But Peter said: O man, I am not.

Another, etc... Observe here, in order to reconcile the four
Evangelists, that divers persons concurred in charging Peter with being
Christ's disciple; till at length they brought him to deny him thrice.
1. The porteress that let him in, and afterwards seeing him at the fire,
first put the question to him; and then positively affirmed that he was
with Christ. 2.  Another maid accused him to the standers by; and gave
occasion to the man here mentioned to renew the charge against him,
which caused the second denial. 3. Others of the company took notice of
his being a Galilean; and were seconded by the kinsman of Malchus, who
affirmed he had seen him in the garden. And this drew on the third
denial.

22:59. And after the space, as it were of one hour, another certain man
affirmed, saying: Of a truth, this man was also with him: for he is also
a Galilean.

22:60. And Peter said: Man, I know not what thou sayest. And
immediately, as he was yet speaking, the cock crew.

22:61. And the Lord turning looked on Peter. And Peter remembered the
word of the Lord, as he had said: Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny
thrice.

22:62. And Peter going out, wept bitterly.

22:63. And the men that held him mocked him and struck him.

22:64. And they blindfolded him and smote his face. And they asked him
saying: Prophesy: Who is it that struck thee?

22:65. And blaspheming, many other things they said against him.

22:66. And as soon as it was day, the ancients of the people and the
chief priests and scribes came together. And they brought him into their
council saying: If thou be the Christ, tell us.

22:67. And he saith to them: If I shall tell you, you will not believe
me.

22:68. And if I shall also ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me
go.

22:69. But hereafter the Son of man shall be sitting on the right hand
of the power of God.

22:70. Then said they all: Art thou then the Son of God? Who said: You
say that I am.

22:71. And they said: What need we any further testimony? For we
ourselves have heard it from his own mouth.

Luke Chapter 23

The continuation of the history of the passion.

23:1. And the whole multitude of them, rising up, led him to Pilate.

23:2. And they began to accuse him, saying: We have found this man
perverting our nation and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar and
saying that he is Christ the king.

23:3. And Pilate asked him, saying: Art thou the king of the Jews?  But
he answering, said: Thou sayest it.

23:4. And Pilate said to the chief priests and to the multitudes: I find
no cause in this man.

23:5. But they were more earnest, saying: He stirreth up the people,
teaching throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee to this place.

23:6. But Pilate hearing Galilee, asked if the man were of Galilee?

23:7. And when he understood that he was of Herod's jurisdiction, he
sent him away to Herod, who was also himself at Jerusalem in those days.

23:8. And Herod seeing Jesus, was very glad: for he was desirous of a
long time to see him, because he had heard many things of him; and he
hoped to see some sign wrought by him.

23:9. And he questioned him in many words. But he answered him nothing.

23:10. And the chief priests and the scribes stood by, earnestly
accusing him.

23:11. And Herod with his army set him at nought and mocked him, putting
on him a white garment: and sent him back to Pilate.

23:12. And Herod and Pilate were made friends, that same day: for before
they were enemies one to another.

23:13. And Pilate, calling together the chief priests and the
magistrates and the people,

23:14. Said to them: You have presented unto me this man as one that
perverteth the people. And behold I, having examined him before you,
find no cause in this man, in those things wherein you accuse him.

23:15. No, nor Herod neither. For, I sent you to him: and behold,
nothing worthy of death is done to him.

23:16. I will chastise him therefore and release him.

23:17. Now of necessity he was to release unto them one upon the feast
day.

23:18. But the whole multitude together cried out, saying: Away with
this man, and release unto us Barabbas:

23:19. Who, for a certain sedition made in the city and for a murder,
was cast into prison.

23:20. And Pilate again spoke to them, desiring to release Jesus.

23:21. But they cried again, saying: Crucify him, Crucify him.

23:22. And he said to them the third time: Why, what evil hath this man
done? I find no cause of death in him. I will chastise him therefore and
let him go.

23:23. But they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might
be crucified. And their voices prevailed.

23:24. And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required.

23:25. And he released unto them him who for murder and sedition had
been cast into prison, whom they had desired. But Jesus he delivered up
to their will.

23:26. And as they led him away, they laid hold of one Simon of Cyrene,
coming from the country; and they laid the cross on him to carry after
Jesus.

23:27. And there followed him a great multitude of people and of women,
who bewailed and lamented him.

23:28. But Jesus turning to them, said: Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not
over me; but weep for yourselves and for your children.

23:29. For behold, the days shall come, wherein they will say: Blessed
are the barren and the wombs that have not borne and the paps that have
not given suck.

23:30. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains: Fall upon us. And
to the hills: Cover us.

23:31. For if in the green wood they do these things, what shall be done
in the dry?

23:32. And there were also two other malefactors led with him to be put
to death.

23:33. And when they were come to the place which is called Calvary,
they crucified him there: and the robbers, one on the right hand, and
the other on the left.

23:34. And Jesus said: Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
do. But they, dividing his garments, cast lots.

23:35. And the people stood beholding. And the rulers with them derided
him, saying: He saved others: let him save himself, if he be Christ, the
elect of God.

23:36. And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him and offering him
vinegar,

23:37. And saying: If thou be the king of the Jews, save thyself.

23:38. And there was also a superscription written over him in letters
of Greek and Latin and Hebrew THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

23:39. And one of those robbers who were hanged blasphemed him, saying:
If thou be Christ, save thyself and us.

23:40. But the other answering, rebuked him, saying: Neither dost thou
fear God, seeing; thou art under the same condemnation?

23:41. And we indeed justly: for we receive the due reward of our deeds.
But this man hath done no evil.

23:42. And he said to Jesus: Lord, remember me when thou shalt come into
thy kingdom.

23:43. And Jesus said to him: Amen I say to thee: This day thou shalt be
with me in paradise.

In paradise... That is, in the happy state of rest, joy, and peace
everlasting. Christ was pleased, by a special privilege, to reward the
faith and confession of the penitent thief, with a full discharge of all
his sins, both as to the guilt and punishment; and to introduce him
immediately after death into the happy society of the saints, whose
limbo, that is, the place of their confinement, was now made a paradise
by our Lord's going thither.

23:44. And it was almost the sixth hour: and there was darkness over all
the earth until the ninth hour.

23:45. And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in
the midst.

23:46. And Jesus crying with a loud voice, said: Father, into thy hands
I commend my spirit. And saying this, he gave up the ghost.

23:47. Now, the centurion, seeing what was done, glorified God, saying:
Indeed this was a just man.

23:48. And all the multitude of them that were come together to that
sight and saw the things that were done returned, striking their
breasts.

23:49. And all his acquaintance and the women that had followed him from
Galilee stood afar off, beholding these things.

23:50. And behold there was a man named Joseph who was a counsellor, a
good and a just man,

23:51. (The same had not consented to their counsel and doings) of
Arimathea, a city of Judea: who also himself looked for the kingdom of
God.

23:52. This man went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus.

23:53. And taking him down, he wrapped him in fine linen and laid him in
a sepulchre that was hewed in stone, wherein never yet any man had been
laid.

23:54. And it was the day of the Parasceve: and the sabbath drew on.

Parasceve... That is, the eve, or day of preparation for the sabbath.

23:55. And the women that were come with him from Galilee, following
after, saw the sepulchre and how his body was laid.

23:56. And returning, they prepared spices and ointments: and on the
sabbath day they rested, according to the commandment.

Luke Chapter 24

Christ's resurrection and manifestation of himself to his disciples.

24:1. And on the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they
came to the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared.

24:2. And they found the stone rolled back from the sepulchre.

24:3. And going in, they found not the body of the Lord Jesus.

24:4. And it came to pass, as they were astonished in their mind at
this, behold, two men stood by them, in shining apparel.

24:5. And as they were afraid and bowed down their countenance towards
the ground, they said unto them: Why seek you the living with the dead?

24:6. He is not here, but is risen. Remember how he spoke unto you, when
he was yet in Galilee,

24:7. Saying: The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful
men and be crucified and the third day rise again.

24:8. And they remembered his words.

24:9. And going back from the sepulchre, they told all these things to
the eleven and to all the rest.

24:10. And it was Mary Magdalen and Joanna and Mary of James and the
other women that were with them, who told these things to the apostles.

24:11. And these words seemed to them as idle tales: and they did not
believe them.

24:12. But Peter rising up, ran to the sepulchre and, stooping down, he
saw the linen cloths laid by themselves: and went away wondering in
himself at that which was come to pass.

24:13. And behold, two of them went, the same day, to a town which was
sixty furlongs from Jerusalem, named Emmaus.

24:14. And they talked together of all these things which had happened.

24:15. And it came to pass that while they talked and reasoned with
themselves, Jesus himself also, drawing near, went with them.

24:16. But their eyes were held, that they should not know him.

24:17. And he said to them: What are these discourses that you hold one
with another as you walk and are sad?

24:18. And the one of them, whose name was Cleophas, answering, said to
him: Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the
things that have been done there in these days?

24:19. To whom he said: What things? And they said: Concerning Jesus of
Nazareth, who was a prophet, mighty in work and word before God and all
the people.

24:20. And how our chief priests and princes delivered him to be
condemned to death and crucified him.

24:21. But we hoped that it was he that should have redeemed Israel. And
now besides all this, to-day is the third day since these things were
done.

24:22. Yea and certain women also of our company affrighted us who,
before it was light, were at the sepulchre,

24:23. And not finding his body, came, saying that they had all seen a
vision of angels, who say that he is alive.

24:24. And some of our people went to the sepulchre and found it so as
the women had said: but him they found not.

24:25. Then he said to them: O foolish and slow of heart to believe in
all things, Which the prophets have spoken.

24:26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things and so, to enter
into his glory?

24:27. And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded to them
in all the scriptures the things that were concerning him.

24:28. And they drew nigh to the town whither they were going: and he
made as though he would go farther.

24:29. But they constrained him, saying: Stay with us, because it is
towards evening and the day is now far spent. And he went in with them.

24:30. And it came to pass, whilst he was at table with them, he took
bread and blessed and brake and gave to them.

24:31. And their eyes were opened: and they knew him. And he vanished
out of their sight.

24:32. And they said one to the other: Was not our heart burning within
us, whilst he spoke in the way and opened to us the scriptures?

24:33. And rising up, the same hour, they went back to Jerusalem: and
they found the eleven gathered together, and those that were with them,

24:34. Saying: The Lord is risen indeed and hath appeared to Simon.

24:35. And they told what things were done in the way: and how they knew
him in the breaking of bread.

24:36. Now, whilst they were speaking these things, Jesus stood in the
midst of them and saith to them: Peace be to you. It is I: Fear not.

24:37. But they being troubled and frightened, supposed that they saw a
spirit.

24:38. And he said to them: Why are you troubled, and why do thoughts
arise in your hearts?

24:39. See my hands and feet, that it is I myself. Handle, and see: for
a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see me to have.

24:40. And when he had said this, he shewed them his hands and feet.

24:41. But while they yet believed not and wondered for joy, he said:
Have you here any thing to eat?

24:42. And they offered him a piece of a broiled fish and a honeycomb.

24:43. And when he had eaten before them, taking the remains, he gave to
them.

24:44. And he said to them: These are the words which I spoke to you
while I was yet with you, that all things must needs be fulfilled which
are written in the law of Moses and in the prophets and in the psalms,
concerning me.

24:45. Then he opened their understanding, that they might understand
the scriptures.

24:46. And he said to them: Thus it is written, and thus it behoved
Christ to suffer and to rise again from the dead, the third day:

24:47. And that penance and remission of sins should be preached in his
name, unto all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

24:48. And you are witnesses of these things.

24:49. And I send the promise of my Father upon you: but stay you in the
city till you be endued with power from on high.

The promise of my Father... that is, the Holy Ghost, whom Christ had
promised that his Father and he would send, John 14. 26, and 17. 7.

24:50. And he led them out as far as Bethania: and lifting up his hands,
he blessed them.

24:51. And it came to pass, whilst he blessed them, he departed from
them and was carried up to heaven.

24:52. And they adoring went back into Jerusalem with great joy.

24:53. And they were always in the temple, praising and blessing God.
Amen.






THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN

St. John the Apostle and Evangelist was the son of Zebedee and Salome,
brother to James the Greater. He was called the Beloved disciple of
Christ and stood by at his Crucifixion. He wrote the Gospel after the
other Evangelists, about sixty-three years after our Lord's Ascension.
Many things that they had omitted were supplied by him. The original was
written in Greek; and by the Greeks he is titled: The Divine, St. Jerome
relates that, when he was earnestly requested by the brethren to write
the Gospel, he answered he would do it, if by ordering a common fast,
they would all put up their prayers together to the Almighty God; which
being ended replenished with the clearest and fullest revelation coming
from Heaven, he burst forth into that preface: IN THE BEGINNING WAS THE
WORD.


John Chapter 1

The divinity and incarnation of Christ. John bears witness of him. He
begins to call his disciples.

1:1. In the beginning was the Word: and the Word was with God: and the
Word was God.

1:2. The same was in the beginning with God.

1:3. All things were made by him: and without him was made nothing that
was made.

1:4. In him was life: and the life was the light of men.

1:5. And the light shineth in darkness: and the darkness did not
comprehend it.

1:6. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.

1:7. This man came for a witness, to give testimony of the light, that
all men might believe through him.

1:8. He was not the light, but was to give testimony of the light.

1:9. That was the true light, which enlighteneth every man that cometh
into this world.

1:10. He was in the world: and the world was made by him: and the world
knew him not.

1:11. He came unto his own: and his own received him not.

1:12. But as many as received him, he gave them power to be made the
sons of God, to them that believe in his name.

1:13. Who are born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God.

1:14. And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us (and we saw his
glory, the glory as it were of the only begotten of the Father), full of
grace and truth.

1:15. John beareth witness of him and crieth out, saying: This was he of
whom I spoke: He that shall come after me is preferred before me:
because he was before me.

1:16. And of his fulness we all have received: and grace for grace.

1:17. For the law was given by Moses: grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ.

1:18. No man hath seen God at any time: the only begotten Son who is in
the Bosom of the Father, he hath declared him.

1:19. And this is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent from
Jerusalem priests and Levites to him, to ask him: Who art thou?

1:20. And he confessed and did not deny: and he confessed: I am not the
Christ.

1:21. And they asked him: What then? Art thou Elias? And he said: I am
not. Art thou the prophet? And he answered: No.

1:22. They said therefore unto him: Who art thou, that we may give an
answer to them that sent us? What sayest thou of thyself?

1:23. He said: I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, make
straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Isaias.

1:24. And they that were sent were of the Pharisees.

1:25. And they asked him and said to him: Why then dost thou baptize, if
thou be not Christ, nor Elias, nor the prophet?

1:26. John answered them, saying: I baptize with water: but there hath
stood one in the midst of you, whom you know not.

1:27. The same is he that shall come after me, who is preferred before
me: the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to loose.

1:28. These things were done in Bethania, beyond the Jordan, where John
was baptizing.

1:29. The next day, John saw Jesus coming to him; and he saith: Behold
the Lamb of God. Behold him who taketh away the sin of the world.

1:30. This is he of whom I said: After me there cometh a man, who is
preferred before me: because he was before me.

1:31. And I knew him not: but that he may be made manifest in Israel,
therefore am I come baptizing with water.

1:32. And John gave testimony, saying: I saw the Spirit coming down, as
a dove from heaven; and he remained upon him.

1:33. And I knew him not: but he who sent me to baptize with water said
to me: He upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining
upon him, he it is that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.

1:34. And I saw: and I gave testimony that this is the Son of God.

1:35. The next day again John stood and two of his disciples.

1:36. And beholding Jesus walking, he saith: Behold the Lamb of God.

1:37. And the two disciples heard him speak: and they followed Jesus.

1:38. And Jesus turning and seeing them following him, saith to them:
What seek you? Who said to him: Rabbi (which is to say, being
interpreted, Master), where dwellest thou?

1:39. He saith to them: Come and see. They came and saw where he abode:
and they stayed with him that day. Now it was about the tenth hour.

1:40. And Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who had
heard of John and followed him.

1:41. He findeth first his brother Simon and saith to him: We have found
the Messias, which is, being interpreted, the Christ.

1:42. And he brought him to Jesus. And Jesus looking upon him, said:
Thou art Simon the son of Jona. Thou shalt be called Cephas, which is
interpreted Peter.

1:43. On the following day, he would go forth into Galilee: and he
findeth Philip, And Jesus saith to him: follow me.

1:44. Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.

1:45. Philip findeth Nathanael and saith to him: We have found him of
whom Moses, in the law and the prophets did write, Jesus the son of
Joseph of Nazareth.

1:46. And Nathanael said to him: Can any thing of good come from
Nazareth? Philip saith to him: Come and see.

1:47. Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him and he saith of him: Behold an
Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile.

1:48. Nathanael saith to him: Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered and
said to him: Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the
fig tree, I saw thee.

1:49. Nathanael answered him and said: Rabbi: Thou art the Son of God.
Thou art the King of Israel.

1:50. Jesus answered and said to him: Because I said unto thee, I saw
thee under the fig tree, thou believest: greater things than these shalt
thou see.

1:51. And he saith to him: Amen, amen, I say to you, you shall see the
heaven opened and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the
Son of man.

John Chapter 2

Christ changes water into wine. He casts the sellers out of the temple.

2:1. And the third day, there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee: and the
mother of Jesus was there.

2:2. And Jesus also was invited, and his disciples, to the marriage.

2:3. And the wine failing, the mother of Jesus saith to him: They have
no wine.

2:4. And Jesus saith to her: Woman, what is that to me and to thee? My
hour is not yet come.

What is that to me, etc... These words of our Saviour, spoken to his
mother, have been understood by some commentators as harsh, they not
considering the next following verse: Whatsoever he shall say to you, do
ye, which plainly shows that his mother knew of the miracle that he was
to perform, and that it was at her request he wrought it; besides the
manner of speaking the words as to the tone, and the countenance shown
at the same time, which could only be known to those who were present,
or from what had followed: for words indicating anger in one tone of
voice, would be understood quite the reverse in another.

2:5. His mother saith to the waiters: Whatsoever he shall say to you, do
ye.

2:6. Now there were set there six waterpots of stone, according to the
manner of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three measures
apiece.

2:7. Jesus saith to them: Fill the waterpots with water. And they filled
them up to the brim.

2:8. And Jesus saith to them: Draw out now and carry to the chief
steward of the feast. And they carried it.

2:9. And when the chief steward had tasted the water made wine and knew
not whence it was, but the waiters knew who had drawn the water: the
chief steward calleth the bridegroom,

2:10. And saith to him: Every man at first setteth forth good wine, and
when men have well drunk, then that which is worse.  But thou hast kept
the good wine until now.

2:11. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee and
manifested his glory. And his disciples believed in him.

2:12. After this, he went down to Capharnaum, he and his mother and his
brethren and his disciples: and they remained there not many days.

2:13. And the pasch of the Jews was at hand: and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.

2:14. And he found in the temple them that sold oxen and sheep and
doves, and the changers of money sitting.

2:15. And when he had made, as it were, a scourge of little cords, he
drove them all out of the temple, the sheep also and the oxen: and the
money of the changers he poured out, and the tables he overthrew.

2:16. And to them that sold doves he said: Take these things hence, and
make not the house of my Father a house of traffic.

2:17. And his disciples remembered, that it was written: The zeal of thy
house hath eaten me up.

2:18. The Jews, therefore, answered, and said to him: What sign dost
thou shew unto us, seeing thou dost these things?

2:19. Jesus answered and said to them: Destroy this temple; and in three
days I will raise it up.

2:20. The Jews then said: Six and forty years was this temple in
building; and wilt thou raise it up in three days?

2:21. But he spoke of the temple of his body.

2:22. When therefore he was risen again from the dead, his disciples
remembered that he had said this: and they believed the scripture and
the word that Jesus had said.

2:23. Now when he was at Jerusalem, at the pasch, upon the festival day,
many believed in his name, seeing his signs which he did.

2:24. But Jesus did not trust himself unto them: for that he knew all
men,

2:25. And because he needed not that any should give testimony of man:
for he knew what was in man.

John Chapter 3

Christ's discourse with Nicodemus. John's testimony.

3:1. And there was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of
the Jews.

3:2. This man came to Jesus by night and said to him: Rabbi, we know
that thou art come a teacher from God; for no man can do these signs
which thou dost, unless God be with him.

3:3. Jesus answered and said to him: Amen, amen, I say to thee, unless a
man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

3:4. Nicodemus saith to him: How can a man be born when he is old? Can
he enter a second time into his mother's womb and be born again?

3:5. Jesus answered: Amen, amen, I say to thee, unless a man be born
again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God.

Unless a man be born again, etc... By these words our Saviour hath
declared the necessity of baptism; and by the word water it is evident
that the application of it is necessary with the words. Matt. 28. 19.

3:6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh: and that which is born of
the Spirit is spirit.

3:7. Wonder not that I said to thee: You must be born again.

3:8. The Spirit breatheth where he will and thou hearest his voice: but
thou knowest not whence he cometh and whither he goeth. So is every one
that is born of the Spirit.

3:9. Nicodemus answered and said to him: How can these things be done?

3:10. Jesus answered and said to him: Art thou a master in Israel, and
knowest not these things?

3:11. Amen, amen, I say to thee that we speak what we know and we
testify what we have seen: and you receive not our testimony.

3:12. If I have spoken to you earthly things, and you believe not: how
will you believe, if I shall speak to you heavenly things?

3:13. And no man hath ascended into heaven, but he that descended from
heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven.

3:14. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the desert, so must the Son
of man be lifted up:

3:15. That whosoever believeth in him may not perish, but may have life
everlasting.

3:16. For God so loved the world, as to give his only begotten Son: that
whosoever believeth in him may not perish, but may have life
everlasting.

3:17. For God sent not his Son into the world, to judge the world: but
that the world may be saved by him.

3:18. He that believeth in him is not judged. But he that doth not
believe is already judged: because he believeth not in the name of the
only begotten Son of God.

Is not judged... He that believeth, viz., by a faith working through
charity, is not judged, that is, is not condemned; but the obstinate
unbeliever is judged, that is, condemned already, by retrenching himself
from the society of Christ and his church.

3:19. And this is the judgment: Because the light is come into the world
and men loved darkness rather than the light: for their works were evil.

The judgment... That is, the cause of his comdemnation.

3:20. For every one that doth evil hateth the light and cometh not to
the light, that his works may not be reproved.

3:21. But he that doth truth cometh to the light, that his works may be
made manifest: because they are done in God.

He that doth truth... that is, he that acteth according to truth, which
here signifies the Law of God. Thy law is truth.  Psa. 118. 142.

3:22. After these things, Jesus and his disciples came into the land of
Judea: and there he abode with them and baptized.

3:23. And John also was baptizing in Ennon near Salim: because there was
much water there. And they came and were baptized.

3:24. For John was not yet cast into prison.

3:25. And there arose a question between some of John's disciples and
the Jews, concerning purification.

3:26. And they came to John and said to him: Rabbi, he that was with
thee beyond the Jordan, to whom thou gavest testimony: behold, he
baptizeth and all men come to him.

3:27. John answered and said: A man cannot receive any thing, unless it
be given him from heaven.

3:28. You yourselves do bear me witness that I said that I am not
Christ, but that I am sent before him.

3:29. He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the
bridegroom, who standeth and heareth Him, rejoiceth with joy because of
the bridegroom's voice. This my joy therefore is fulfilled.

3:30. He must increase: but I must decrease.

3:31. He that cometh from above is above all. He that is of the earth,
of the earth he is, and of the earth he speaketh. He that cometh from
heaven is above all.

3:32. And what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth: and no man
receiveth his testimony.

3:33. He that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that God
is true.

3:34. For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God: for God doth
not give the Spirit by measure.

3:35. The Father loveth the Son: and he hath given all things into his
hand.

3:36. He that believeth in the Son hath life everlasting: but he that
believeth not the Son shall not see life: but the wrath of God abideth
on him.

John Chapter 4

Christ talks with the Samaritan woman. He heals the ruler's son.

4:1. When Jesus therefore understood the Pharisees had heard that Jesus
maketh more disciples and baptizeth more than John,

4:2. (Though Jesus himself did not baptize, but his disciples),

4:3. He left Judea and went again into Galilee.

4:4. And he was of necessity to pass through Samaria.

4:5. He cometh therefore to a city of Samaria, which is called Sichar,
near the land which Jacob gave to his son Joseph.

4:6. Now Jacob's well was there. Jesus therefore, being wearied with his
journey, sat thus on the well. It was about the sixth hour.

4:7. There cometh a woman of Samaria, to draw water. Jesus saith to her:
Give me to drink.

4:8. For his disciples were gone into the city to buy meats.

4:9. Then that Samaritan woman saith to him: How dost thou, being a Jew;
ask of me to drink, who am a Samaritan woman? For the Jews do not
communicate with the Samaritans.

4:10. Jesus answered and said to her: If thou didst know the gift of God
and who he is that saith to thee: Give me to drink; thou perhaps wouldst
have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.

4:11. The woman saith to him: Sir, thou hast nothing wherein to draw,
and the well is deep. From whence then hast thou living water?

4:12. Art thou greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well and
drank thereof, himself and his children and his cattle?

4:13. Jesus answered and said to her: Whosoever drinketh of this water
shall thirst again: but he that shall drink of the water that I will
give him shall not thirst for ever.

4:14. But the water that I will give him shall become in him a fountain
of water, springing up into life everlasting.

4:15. The woman said to him: Sir, give me this water, that I may not
thirst, nor come hither to draw.

4:16. Jesus saith to her: Go, call thy husband, and come hither.

4:17. The woman answered and said: I have no husband. Jesus said to her:
Thou hast said well: I have no husband.

4:18. For thou hast had five husbands: and he whom thou now hast is not
thy husband. This, thou hast said truly.

4:19. The woman saith to him: Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet.

4:20. Our fathers adored on this mountain: and you say that at Jerusalem
is the place where men must adore.

This mountain... Garizim, where the Samaritans had their schismatical
temple.

4:21. Jesus saith to her: Woman, believe me that the hour cometh, when
you shall neither on this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, adore the Father.

4:22. You adore that which you know not: we adore that which we know.
For salvation is of the Jews.

4:23. But the hour cometh and now is, when the true adorers shall adore
the Father in spirit and in truth. For the Father also seeketh such to
adore him.

4:24. God is a spirit: and they that adore him must adore him in spirit
and in truth.

4:25. The woman saith to him: I know that the Messias cometh (who is
called Christ): therefore, when he is come, he will tell us all things.

4:26. Jesus saith to her: I am he, who am speaking with thee.

4:27. And immediately his disciples came. And they wondered that he
talked with the woman. Yet no man said: What seekest thou?  Or: Why
talkest thou with her?

4:28. The woman therefore left her waterpot and went her way into the
city and saith to the men there:

4:29. Come, and see a man who has told me all things whatsoever I have
done. Is not he the Christ?

4:30. They went therefore out of the city and came unto him.

4:31. In the mean time, the disciples prayed him, saying: Rabbi, eat.

4:32. But he said to them: I have meat to eat which you know not.

4:33. The disciples therefore said one to another: Hath any man brought
him to eat?

4:34. Jesus saith to them: My meat is to do the will of him that sent
me, that I may perfect his work.

4:35. Do not you say: There are yet four months, and then the harvest
cometh? Behold, I say to you, lift up your eyes, and see the countries.
For they are white already to harvest.

4:36. And he that reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto life
everlasting: that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice
together.

4:37. For in this is the saying true: That it is one man that soweth,
and it is another that reapeth.

4:38. I have sent you to reap that in which you did not labour.  Others
have laboured: and you have entered into their labours.

4:39. Now of that city many of the Samaritans believed in him, for the
word of the woman giving testimony: He told me all things whatsoever I
have done.

4:40. So when the Samaritans were come to him, they desired that he
would tarry there. And he abode there two days.

4:41. And many more believed in him, because of his own word.

4:42. And they said to the woman: We now believe, not for thy saying:
for we ourselves have heard him and know that this is indeed the Saviour
of the world.

4:43. Now after two days, he departed thence and went into Galilee.

4:44. For Jesus himself gave testimony that a prophet hath no honour in
his own country.

4:45. And when he was come into Galilee, the Galileans received him,
having seen all the things he had done at Jerusalem on the festival day:
for they also went to the festival day.

4:46. He came again therefore into Cana of Galilee, where he made the
water wine. And there was a certain ruler, whose son was sick at
Capharnaum.

4:47. He having heard that Jesus was come from Judea into Galilee, sent
to him and prayed him to come down and heal his son: for he was at the
point of death.

4:48. Jesus therefore said to him: Unless you see signs and wonders, you
believe not.

4:49. The ruler saith to him: Lord, come down before that my son die.

4:50. Jesus saith to him: Go thy way. Thy son liveth. The man believed
the word which Jesus said to him and went his way.

4:51. And as he was going down, his servants met him: and they brought
word, saying, that his son lived.

4:52. He asked therefore of them the hour wherein he grew better.  And
they said to him: Yesterday at the seventh hour, the fever left him.

4:53. The father therefore knew that it was at the same hour that Jesus
said to him: Thy son liveth. And himself believed, and his whole house.

4:54. This is again the second miracle that Jesus did, when he was come
out of Judea into Galilee.

John Chapter 5

Christ heals on the sabbath the man languishing thirty-eight years. His
discourse upon this occasion.

5:1. After these things was a festival day of the Jews: and Jesus went
up to Jerusalem.

5:2. Now there is at Jerusalem a pond, called Probatica, which in Hebrew
is named Bethsaida, having five porches.

Probatica... That is, the sheep pond; either so called, because the
sheep were washed therein, that were to be offered up in sacrifice in
the temple, or because it was near the sheep gate.  That this was a pond
where miracles were wrought is evident from the sacred text; and also
that the water had no natural virtue to heal, as one only of those put
in after the motion of the water was restored to health; for if the
water had the healing quality, the others would have the like benefit,
being put into it about the same time.

5:3. In these lay a great multitude of sick, of blind, of lame, of
withered: waiting for the moving of the water.

5:4. And an angel of the Lord descended at certain times into the pond
and the water was moved. And he that went down first into the pond after
the motion of the water was made whole of whatsoever infirmity he lay
under.

5:5. And there was a certain man there that had been eight and thirty
years under his infirmity.

5:6. Him when Jesus had seen lying, and knew that he had been now a long
time, he saith to him: Wilt thou be made whole?

5:7. The infirm man answered him: Sir, I have no man, when the water is
troubled, to put me into the pond. For whilst I am coming, another goeth
down before me.

5:8. Jesus saith to him: Arise, take up thy bed and walk.

5:9. And immediately the man was made whole: and he took up his bed and
walked. And it was the sabbath that day.

5:10. The Jews therefore said to him that was healed: It is the sabbath.
It is not lawful for thee to take up thy bed.

5:11. He answered them: He that made me whole, he said to me: Take up
thy bed and walk.

5:12. They asked him therefore: Who is that man who said to thee: Take
up thy bed and walk?

5:13. But he who was healed knew not who it was: for Jesus went aside
from the multitude standing in the place.

5:14. Afterwards, Jesus findeth him in the temple and saith to him:
Behold thou art made whole: sin no more, lest some worse thing happen to
thee.

5:15. The man went his way and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had
made him whole.

5:16. Therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, because he did these
things on the sabbath.

5:17. But Jesus answered them: My Father worketh until now; and I work.

5:18. Hereupon therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because
he did not only break the sabbath but also said God was his Father,
making himself equal to God.

5:19. Then Jesus answered and said to them: Amen, amen, I say unto you,
the Son cannot do any thing of himself, but what he seeth the Father
doing: for what things soever he doth, these the Son also doth in like
manner.

5:20. For the Father loveth the Son and sheweth him all things which
himself doth: and greater works than these will he shew him, that you
may wonder.

5:21. For as the Father raiseth up the dead and giveth life: so the Son
also giveth life to whom he will.

5:22. For neither does the Father judge any man: but hath given all
judgment to the Son.

5:23. That all men may honour the Son, as they honour the Father. He who
honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father who hath sent him.

5:24. Amen, amen, I say unto you that he who heareth my word and
believeth him that sent me hath life everlasting: and cometh not into
judgment, but is passed from death to life.

5:25. Amen, amen, I say unto you, that the hour cometh, and now is, when
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear
shall live.

5:26. For as the Father hath life in himself, so he hath given to the
Son also to have life in himself.

5:27. And he hath given him power to do judgment, because he is the Son
of man.

5:28. Wonder not at this: for the hour cometh wherein all that are in
the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God.

5:29. And they that have done good things shall come forth unto the
resurrection of life: but they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of judgment.

Unto the resurrection of judgment... That is, condemnation.

5:30. I cannot of myself do any thing. As I hear, so I judge.  And my
judgment is just: because I seek not my own will, but the will of him
that sent me.

5:31. If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true.

5:32. There is another that beareth witness of me: and I know that the
witness which he witnesseth of me is true.

5:33. You sent to John: and he gave testimony to the truth.

5:34. But I receive not testimony from man: but I say these things, that
you may be saved.

5:35. He was a burning and a shining light: and you were willing for a
time to rejoice in his light.

5:36. But I have a greater testimony than that of John: for the works
which the Father hath given me to perfect, the works themselves which I
do, give testimony of me, that the Father hath sent me.

5:37. And the Father himself who hath sent me hath given testimony of
me: neither have you heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.

5:38. And you have not his word abiding in you: for whom he hath sent,
him you believe not.

5:39. Search the scriptures: for you think in them to have life
everlasting. And the same are they that give testimony of me.

Or... You search the scriptures. Scrutamini... It is not a command for
all to read the scriptures; but a reproach to the Pharisees, that
reading the scriptures as they did, and thinking to find everlasting
life in them, they would not receive him to whom all those scriptures
gave testimony, and through whom alone they could have that true life.

5:40. And you will not come to me that you may have life.

5:41. I receive not glory from men.

5:42. But I know you, that you have not the love of God in you.

5:43. I am come in the name of my Father, and you receive me not: if
another shall come in his own name, him you will receive.

5:44. How can you believe, who receive glory one from another: and the
glory which is from God alone, you do not seek?

5:45. Think not that I will accuse you to the Father. There is one that
accuseth you, Moses, in whom you trust.

5:46. For if you did believe Moses, you would perhaps believe me also:
for he wrote of me.

5:47. But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my
words?

John Chapter 6

Christ feeds five thousand with five loaves. He walks upon the sea and
discourses of the bread of life.

6:1. After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, which is
that of Tiberias.

6:2. And a great multitude followed him, because they saw the miracles
which he did on them that were diseased.

6:3. Jesus therefore went up into a mountain: and there he sat with his
disciples.

6:4. Now the pasch, the festival day of the Jews, was near at hand.

6:5. When Jesus therefore had lifted up his eyes and seen that a very
great multitude cometh to him, he said to Philip: Whence shall we buy
bread, that these may eat?

6:6. And this he said to try him: for he himself knew what he would do.

6:7. Philip answered him: Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not
sufficient for them that every one may take a little.

6:8. One of his disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, saith to
him:

6:9. There is a boy here that hath five barley loaves and two fishes.
But what are these among so many?

6:10. Then Jesus said: Make the men sit down. Now, there was much grass
in the place. The men therefore sat down, in number about five thousand.

6:11. And Jesus took the loaves: and when he had given thanks, he
distributed to them that were set down. In like manner also of the
fishes, as much as they would.

6:12. And when they were filled, he said to his disciples: gather up the
fragments that remain, lest they be lost.

6:13. They gathered up therefore and filled twelve baskets with the
fragments of the five barley loaves which remained over and above to
them that had eaten.

6:14. Now those men, when they had seen what a miracle Jesus had done,
said: This is of a truth the prophet that is to come into the world.

6:15. Jesus therefore, when he knew that they would come to take him by
force and make him king, fled again into the mountains, himself alone.

6:16. And when evening was come, his disciples went down to the sea.

6:17. And when they had gone up into a ship, they went over the sea to
Capharnaum. And it was now dark: and Jesus was not come unto them.

6:18. And the sea arose, by reason of a great wind that blew.

6:19. When they had rowed therefore about five and twenty or thirty
furlongs, they see Jesus walking upon the sea and drawing nigh to the
ship. And they were afraid.

6:20. But he saith to them: It is I. Be not afraid.

6:21. They were willing therefore to take him into the ship. And
presently the ship was at the land to which they were going.

6:22. The next day, the multitude that stood on the other side of the
sea saw that there was no other ship there but one: and that Jesus had
not entered into the ship with his disciples, but that his disciples
were gone away alone.

6:23. But other ships came in from Tiberias, nigh unto the place where
they had eaten the bread, the Lord giving thanks.

6:24. When therefore the multitude saw that Jesus was not there, nor his
disciples, they took shipping and came to Capharnaum, seeking for Jesus.

6:25. And when they had found him on that other side of the sea, they
said to him: Rabbi, when camest thou hither?

6:26. Jesus answered them and said: Amen, amen, I say to you, you seek
me, not because you have seen miracles, but because you did eat of the
loaves and were filled.

6:27. Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that which
endureth unto life everlasting, which the Son of man will give you. For
him hath God, the Father, sealed.

6:28. They said therefore unto him: What shall we do, that we may work
the works of God?

6:29. Jesus answered and said to them: This is the work of God, that you
believe in him whom he hath sent.

6:30. They said therefore to him: What sign therefore dost thou shew
that we may see and may believe thee? What dost thou work?

6:31. Our fathers did eat manna in the desert, as it is written: He gave
them bread from heaven to eat.

6:32. Then Jesus said to them: Amen, amen, I say to you; Moses gave you
not bread from heaven, but my Father giveth you the true bread from
heaven.

6:33. For the bread of God is that which cometh down from heaven and
giveth life to the world.

6:34. They said therefore unto him: Lord, give us always this bread.

6:35. And Jesus said to them: I am the bread of life. He that cometh to
me shall not hunger: and he that believeth in me shall never thirst.

6:36. But I said unto you that you also have seen me, and you believe
not.

6:37. All that the Father giveth to me shall come to me: and him that
cometh to me, I will not cast out.

6:38. Because I came down from heaven, not to do my own will but the
will of him that sent me.

6:39. Now this is the will of the Father who sent me: that of all that
he hath given me, I should lose nothing; but should raise it up again in
the last day.

6:40. And this is the will of my Father that sent me: that every one who
seeth the Son and believeth in him may have life everlasting. And I will
raise him up in the last day.

6:41. The Jews therefore murmured at him, because he had said: I am the
living bread which came down from heaven.

6:42. And they said: Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father
and mother we know? How then saith he: I came down from heaven?

6:43. Jesus therefore answered and said to them: Murmur not among
yourselves.

6:44. No man can come to me, except the Father, who hath sent me, draw
him. And I will raise him up in the last day.

Draw him... Not by compulsion, nor by laying the free will under any
necessity, but by the strong and sweet motions of his heavenly grace.

6:45. It is written in the prophets: And they shall all be taught of
God. Every one that hath heard of the Father and hath learned cometh
forth me.

6:46. Not that any man hath seen the Father: but he who is of God, he
hath seen the Father.

6:47. Amen, amen, I say unto you: He that believeth in me hath
everlasting life.

6:48. I am the bread of life.

6:49. Your fathers did eat manna in the desert: and are dead.

6:50. This is the bread which cometh down from heaven: that if any man
eat of it, he may not die.

6:51. I am the living bread which came down from heaven.

6:52. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the
bread that I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world.

6:53. The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying: How can this
man give us his flesh to eat?

6:54. Then Jesus said to them: Amen, amen, I say unto you: except you
eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, you shall not have
life in you.

Except you eat and drink, etc... To receive the body and blood of
Christ, is a divine precept, insinuated in this text; which the faithful
fulfil, though they receive but in one kind; because in one kind they
receive both body and blood, which cannot be separated from each other.
Hence, life eternal is here promised to the worthy receiving, though but
in one kind.  Ver. 52. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for
ever; and the bread that I will give, is my flesh for the life of the
world. Ver. 58. He that eateth me, the same also shall live by me. Ver.
59. He that eateth this bread, shall liver for ever.

6:55. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hath everlasting
life: and I will raise him up in the last day.

6:56. For my flesh is meat indeed: and my blood is drink indeed.

6:57. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood abideth in me: and I
in him.

6:58. As the living Father hath sent me and I live by the Father: so he
that eateth me, the same also shall live by me.

6:59. This is the bread that came down from heaven. Not as your fathers
did eat manna and are dead. He that eateth this bread shall live for
ever.

6:60. These things he said, teaching in the synagogue, in Capharnaum.

6:61. Many therefore of his disciples, hearing it, said: This saying is
hard; and who can hear it?

6:62. But Jesus, knowing in himself that his disciples murmured at this,
said to them: Doth this scandalize you?

6:63. If then you shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was
before?

If then you shall see, etc... Christ by mentioning his ascension, by
this instance of his power and divinity, would confirm the truth of what
he had before asserted; and at the same time correct their gross
apprehension of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, in a vulgar
and carnal manner, by letting them know he should take his whole body
living with him to heaven; and consequently not suffer it to be as they
supposed, divided, mangled, and consumed upon earth.

6:64. It is the spirit that quickeneth: the flesh profiteth nothing. The
words that I have spoken to you are spirit and life.

The flesh profiteth nothing... Dead flesh separated from the spirit, in
the gross manner they supposed they were to eat his flesh, would profit
nothing. Neither doth man's flesh, that is to say, man's natural and
carnal apprehension, (which refuses to be subject to the spirit, and
words of Christ,) profit any thing. But it would be the height of
blasphemy, to say the living flesh of Christ (which we receive in the
blessed sacarament, with his spirit, that is, with his soul and
divinity) profiteth nothing. For if Christ's flesh had profitedus
nothing, he would never have taken flesh for us, nor died in us nothing,
he would never have taken flesh for us, nor died in the flesh for us.
Are spirit and life... By proposing to you a heavenly sacrament, in
which you shall receive, in a wonderful manner, spirit, grace, and life,
in its very fountain.

6:65. But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from
the beginning who they were that did not believe and who he was that
would betray him.

6:66. And he said: Therefore did I say to you that no man can come to
me, unless it be given him by my Father.

6:67. After this, many of his disciples went back and walked no more
with him.

6:68. Then Jesus said to the twelve: Will you also go away?

6:69. And Simon Peter answered him: Lord, to whom shall we go?  Thou
hast the words of eternal life.

6:70. And we have believed and have known that thou art the Christ, the
Son of God.

6:71. Jesus answered them: Have not I chosen you twelve? And one of you
is a devil.

6:72. Now he meant Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon: for this same was
about to betray him, whereas he was one of the twelve.

John Chapter 7

Christ goes up to the feast of the tabernacles. He teaches in the
temple.

7:1. After these things, Jesus walked in Galilee: for he would not walk
in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill him.

7:2. Now the Jews feast of tabernacles was at hand.

7:3. And his brethren said to, him: Pass from hence and go into Judea,
that thy disciples also may see thy works which thou dost.

7:4. For there is no man that doth any thing in secret, and he himself
seeketh to be known openly. If thou do these things, manifest thyself to
the world.

7:5. For neither did his brethren believe in him.

7:6. Then Jesus said to them: My time is not yet come; but your time is
always ready.

7:7. The world cannot hate you: but me it hateth, because I give
testimony of it, that the works thereof are evil,

7:8. Go you up to this festival day: but I go not up to this festival
day, because my time is not accomplished.

7:9. When he had said these things, he himself stayed in Galilee.

7:10. But after his brethren were gone up, then he also went up to the
feast, not openly, but, as it were, in secret.

7:11. The Jews therefore sought him on the festival day and said: Where
is he?

7:12. And there was much murmuring among the multitude concerning him.
For some said: He is a good man. And others said: No, but he seduceth
the people.

7:13. Yet no man spoke openly of him, for fear of the Jews.

7:14. Now, about the midst of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple
and taught.

7:15. And the Jews wondered, saying: How doth this man know letters,
having never learned?

7:16. Jesus answered them and said: My doctrine is not mine, but his
that sent me.

7:17. If any man will do the will of him, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself.

7:18. He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory: but he that
seeketh the glory of him that sent him, he is true and there is no
injustice in him.

7:19. Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the
law?

7:20. Why seek you to kill me? The multitude answered and said: Thou
hast a devil. Who seeketh to kill thee?

7:21. Jesus answered and said to them: One work I have done: and you all
wonder.

7:22. Therefore, Moses gave you circumcision (not because it is of
Moses, but of the fathers): and on the sabbath day you circumcise a man.

7:23. If a man receive circumcision on the sabbath day, that the law of
Moses may not be broken: are you angry at me, because I have healed the
whole man on the sabbath day?

7:24. Judge not according to the appearance: but judge just judgment.

7:25. Some therefore of Jerusalem said: Is not this he whom they seek to
kill?

7:26. And behold, he speaketh openly: and they say nothing to him. Have
the rulers known for a truth that this is the Christ?

7:27. But we know this man, whence he is: but when the Christ cometh, no
man knoweth, whence he is.

7:28. Jesus therefore cried out in the temple, teaching and saying: You
both know me, and you know whence I am. And I am not come of myself: but
he that sent me is true, whom you know not.

7:29. I know him, because I am from him: and he hath sent me.

7:30. They sought therefore to apprehend him: and no man laid hands on
him, because his hour was not yet come.

7:31. But of the people many believed in him and said: When the Christ
cometh, shall he do more miracles than this man doth?

7:32. The Pharisees heard the people murmuring these things concerning
him: and the rulers and Pharisees sent ministers to apprehend him.

7:33. Jesus therefore said to them: Yet a little while I am with you:
and then I go to him that sent me.

7:34. You shall seek me and shall not find me: and where I am, thither
you cannot come.

7:35. The Jews therefore said among themselves: Whither will he go, that
we shall not find him? Will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles
and teach the Gentiles?

7:36. What is this saying that he hath said: You shall seek me and shall
not find me? And: Where I am, you cannot come?

7:37. And on the last, and great day of the festivity, Jesus stood and
cried, saying: If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink.

7:38. He that believeth in me, as the scripture saith: Out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water.

7:39. Now this he said of the Spirit which they should receive who
believed in him: for as yet the Spirit was not given, because Jesus was
not yet glorified.

7:40. Of that multitude therefore, when they had heard these words of
his, some said: This is the prophet indeed.

7:41. Others said: This is the Christ. But some said: Doth the Christ
come out of Galilee?

7:42. Doth not the scripture say: That Christ cometh of the seed of
David and from Bethlehem the town where David was?

7:43. So there arose a dissension among the people because of him.

7:44. And some of them would have apprehended him: but no man laid hands
upon him.

7:45. The ministers therefore came to the chief priests and the
Pharisees. And they said to them: Why have you not brought him?

7:46. The ministers answered: Never did man speak like this man.

7:47. The Pharisees therefore answered them: Are you also seduced?

7:48. Hath any one of the rulers believed in him, or of the Pharisees?

7:49. But this multitude, that knoweth not the law, are accursed.

7:50. Nicodemus said to them (he that came to him by night, who was one
of them):

7:51. Doth our law judge any man, unless it first hear him and know what
he doth?

7:52. They answered and said to him: Art thou also a Galilean?  Search
the scriptures, and see that out of Galilee a prophet riseth not.

7:53. And every man returned to his own house.

John Chapter 8

The woman taken in adultery. Christ justifies his doctrine.

8:1. And Jesus went unto mount Olivet.

8:2. And early in the morning he came again into the temple: and all the
people came to him. And sitting down he taught them.

8:3. And the scribes and Pharisees bring unto him a woman taken in
adultery: and they set her in the midst,

8:4. And said to him: Master, this woman was even now taken in adultery.

8:5. Now Moses in the law commanded us to stone such a one. But what
sayest thou?

8:6. And this they said tempting him, that they might accuse him. But
Jesus bowing himself down, wrote with his finger on the ground.

8:7. When therefore they continued asking him, he lifted up himself and
said to them: He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a
stone at her.

8:8. And again stooping down, he wrote on the ground.

8:9. But they hearing this, went out one by one, beginning at the
eldest. And Jesus alone remained, and the woman standing in the midst.

8:10. Then Jesus lifting up himself, said to her: Woman, where are they
that accused thee? Hath no man condemned thee?

8:11. Who said: No man, Lord. And Jesus said: Neither will I condemn
thee. Go, and now sin no more.

8:12. Again therefore, Jesus spoke to: them, saying: I am the light of
the world. He that followeth me walketh not in darkness, but shall have
the light of life.

8:13. The Pharisees therefore said to him: Thou givest testimony of
thyself. Thy testimony is not true.

8:14. Jesus answered and said to them: Although I give testimony of
myself, my testimony is true: for I know whence I came and whither I go.

8:15. You judge according to the flesh: I judge not any man.

8:16. And if I do judge, my judgment is true: because I am not alone,
but I and the Father that sent me.

8:17. And in your law it is written that the testimony of two men is
true.

8:18. I am one that give testimony of myself: and the Father that sent
me giveth testimony of me.

8:19. They said therefore to him: Where is thy Father? Jesus answered:
Neither me do you know, nor my Father. If you did know me, perhaps you
would know my Father also.

8:20. These words Jesus spoke in the treasury, teaching in the temple:
and no man laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come.

8:21. Again therefore Jesus said to them: I go: and you shall seek me.
And you shall die in your sin. Whither I go, you cannot come.

8:22. The Jews therefore said: Will he kill himself, because he said:
Whither I go you cannot come?

8:23. And he said to them: You are from beneath: I am from above. You
are of this world: I am not of this world.

8:24. Therefore I said to you that you shall die in your sins.  For if
you believe not that I am he, you shall die in your sin.

8:25. They said therefore to him: Who art thou? Jesus said to them: The
beginning, who also speak unto you.

8:26. Many things I have to speak and to judge of you. But he that sent
me, is true: and the things I have heard of him, these same I speak in
the world.

8:27. And they understood not that he called God his Father.

8:28. Jesus therefore said to them: When you shall have lifted up, the
Son of man, then shall you know that I am he and that I do nothing of
myself. But as the Father hath taught me, these things I speak.

8:29. And he that sent me is with me: and he hath not left me alone. For
I do always the things that please him.

8:30. When he spoke these things, many believed in him.

8:31. Then Jesus said to those Jews who believed him: If you continue in
my word, you shall be my disciples indeed.

8:32. And you shall know the truth: and the truth shall make you free.

8:33. They answered him: We are the seed of Abraham: and we have never
been slaves to any man. How sayest thou: You shall be free?

8:34. Jesus answered them: Amen, amen, I say unto you that whosoever
committeth sin is the servant of sin.

8:35. Now the servant abideth not in the house for ever: but the son
abideth for ever.

8:36. If therefore the son shall make you free, you shall be free
indeed.

8:37. I know that you are the children of Abraham: but you seek to kill
me, because my word hath no place in you.

8:38. I speak that which I have seen with my Father: and you do the
things that you have seen with your father.

8:39. They answered and said to him: Abraham is our father. Jesus saith
them: If you be the children of Abraham, do the works of Abraham.

8:40. But now you seek to kill me, a man who have spoken the truth to
you, which I have heard of God. This Abraham did not.

8:41. You do the works of your father. They said therefore to him: We
are not born of fornication: we have one Father, even God.

8:42. Jesus therefore said to them: If God were your Father, you would
indeed love me. For from God I proceeded and came. For I came not of
myself: but he sent me.

8:43. Why do you not know my speech? Because you cannot hear my word.

8:44. You are of your father the devil: and the desires of your father
you will do. He was a murderer from the beginning: and he stood not in
the truth, because truth is not in him. When he speaketh a lie, he
speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father thereof.

8:45. But if I say the truth, you believe me not.

8:46. Which of you shall convince me of sin? If I say the truth to you,
why do you not believe me:

8:47. He that is of God heareth the words of God. Therefore you hear
them not, because you are not of God.

8:48. The Jews therefore answered and said to him: Do not we say well
that thou art a Samaritan and hast a devil?

8:49. Jesus answered: I have not a devil: but I honour my Father. And
you have dishonoured me.

8:50. But I seek not my own glory: there is one that seeketh and
judgeth.

8:51. Amen, amen, I say to you: If any man keep my word, he shall not
see death for ever.

8:52. The Jews therefore said: Now we know that thou hast a devil.
Abraham is dead, and the prophets: and thou sayest: If any man keep my
word, he shall not taste death for ever.

8:53. Art thou greater than our father Abraham who is dead? And the
prophets are dead. Whom dost thou make thyself?

8:54. Jesus answered: If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing.  It is
my Father that glorifieth me, of whom you say that he is your God.

8:55. And you have not known him: but I know him. And if I shall say
that I know him not, I shall be like to you, a liar. But I do know him
and do keep his word.

8:56. Abraham your father rejoiced that he might see my day: he saw it
and was glad.

8:57. The Jews therefore said to him: Thou art not yet fifty years old.
And hast thou seen Abraham?

8:58. Jesus said to them: Amen, amen, I say to you, before Abraham was
made, I AM.

8:59. They took up stones therefore to cast at him. But Jesus hid
himself and went out of the temple.

John Chapter 9

He gives sight to the man born blind.

9:1. And Jesus passing by, saw a man who was blind from his birth.

9:2. And his disciples asked him: Rabbi, who hath sinned, this man or
his parents, that he should be born blind?

9:3. Jesus answered: Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents; but
that the works of God should be made manifest in him.

9:4. I must work the works of him that sent me, whilst it is day: the
night cometh, when no man can work.

9:5. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.

9:6. When he had said these things, he spat on the ground and made clay
of the spittle and spread the clay upon his eyes,

9:7. And said to him: Go, wash in the pool of Siloe, which is
interpreted, Sent. He went therefore and washed: and he came seeing.

9:8. The neighbours, therefore, and they who had seen him before that he
was a beggar, said: Is not this he that sat and begged?  Some said: This
is he.

9:9. But others said: No, but he is like him. But he said: I am he.

9:10. They said therefore to him: How were thy eyes opened?

9:11. He answered: That man that is called Jesus made clay and anointed
my eyes and said to me: Go to the pool of Siloe and wash. And I went: I
washed: and I see.

9:12. And they said to him: Where is he? He saith: I know not.

9:13. They bring him that had been blind to the Pharisees.

9:14. Now it was the sabbath, when Jesus made the clay and opened his
eyes.

9:15. Again therefore the Pharisees asked him how he had received his
sight. But he said to them: He put clay upon my eyes: and I washed: and
I see.

9:16. Some therefore of the Pharisees said: This man is not of God, who
keepeth not the sabbath. But others said: How can a man that is a sinner
do such miracles? And there was a division among them.

9:17. They say therefore to the blind man again: What sayest thou of him
that hath opened thy eyes? And he said: He is a prophet.

9:18. The Jews then did not believe concerning him, that he had been
blind and had received his sight, until they called the parents of him
that had received his sight,

9:19. And asked them, saying: Is this your son, who you say was born
blind? How then doth he now see?

9:20. His parents answered them and said: We know that this is our son
and that he was born blind:

9:21. But how he now seeth, we know not: or who hath opened his eyes, we
know not. Ask himself: he is of age: Let him speak for himself.

9:22. These things his parents said, because they feared the Jews: for
the Jews had already agreed among themselves that if any man should
confess him to be Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.

9:23. Therefore did his parents say: He is of age. Ask himself.

9:24. They therefore called the man again that had been blind and said
to him: Give glory to God. We know that this man is a sinner.

9:25. He said therefore to them: If he be a sinner, I know not.  One
thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see.

9:26. They said then to him: What did he to thee? How did he open thy
eyes?

9:27. He answered them: I have told you already, and you have heard. Why
would you hear it again? Will you also become his disciples?

9:28. They reviled him therefore and said: Be thou his disciple; but we
are the disciples of Moses.

9:29. We know that God spoke to Moses: but as to this man, we know not
from whence he is.

9:30. The man answered and said to them: why, herein is a wonderful
thing, that you know not from whence he is, and he hath opened my eyes.

9:31. Now we know that God doth not hear sinners: but if a man be a
server of God and doth his, will, him he heareth.

9:32. From the beginning of the world it hath not been heard, that any
man hath opened the eyes of one born blind.

9:33. Unless this man were of God, he could not do anything.

9:34. They answered and said to him: Thou wast wholly born in sins; and
dost thou teach us? And they cast him out.

9:35. Jesus heard that they had cast him out. And when he had found him,
he said to him: Dost thou believe in the Son of God?

9:36. He answered, and said: Who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?

9:37. And Jesus said to him: Thou hast both seen him; and it is he that
talketh with thee.

9:38. And he said: I believe, Lord. And falling down, he adored him.

9:39. And Jesus said: For judgment I am come into this world: that they
who see not may see; and they who see may become blind.

I am come, etc... Not that Christ came for that end, that any one should
be made blind: but that the Jews, by the abuse of his coming, and by
their not receiving him, brought upon themselves this judgment of
blindness.

9:40. And some of the Pharisees, who were with him, heard: and they said
unto him: Are we also blind?

9:41. Jesus said to them: If you were blind, you should not have sin:
but now you say: We see. Your sin remaineth.

If you were blind, etc... If you were invincibly ignorant, and had
neither read the scriptures, nor seen my miracles, you would not be
guilty of the sin of infidelity: but now, as you boast of your knowledge
of the scriptures, you are inexcusable.

John Chapter 10

Christ is the door and the good shepherd. He and his Father are one.

10:1. Amen, amen, I say to you: He that entereth not by the door into
the sheepfold but climbeth up another way, the same is a thief and a
robber.

10:2. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.

10:3. To him the porter openeth: and the sheep hear his voice.  And he
calleth his own sheep by name and leadeth them out.

10:4. And when he hath let out his own sheep, he goeth before them: and
the sheep follow him, because they know his voice.

10:5. But a stranger they follow not, but fly from him, because they
know not the voice of strangers.

10:6. This proverb Jesus spoke to them. But they understood not what he
spoke.

10:7. Jesus therefore said to them again: Amen, amen, I say to you, I am
the door of the sheep.

10:8. All others, as many as have come, are thieves and robbers: and the
sheep heard them not.

10:9. I am the door. By me, if any man enter in, he shall be saved: and
he shall go in and go out, and shall find pastures.

10:10. The thief cometh not, but for to steal and to kill and to
destroy. I am come that they may have life and may have it more
abundantly.

10:11. I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd giveth his life for his
sheep.

10:12. But the hireling and he that is not the shepherd, whose own the
sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming and leaveth the sheep and flieth:
and the wolf casteth and scattereth the sheep,

10:13. And the hireling flieth, because he is a hireling: and he hath no
care for the sheep.

10:14. I am the good shepherd: and I know mine, and mine know me.

10:15. As the Father knoweth me, and I know the Father: and I lay down
my life for my sheep.

10:16. And other sheep I have that are not of this fold: them also I
must bring. And they shall hear my voice: And there shall be one fold
and one shepherd.

10:17. Therefore doth the Father love me: because I lay down my life,
that I may take it again.

10:18. No man taketh it away from me: but I lay it down of myself.  And
I have power to lay it down: and I have power to take it up again. This
commandment have I received of my Father.

10:19. A dissension rose again among the Jews for these words.

10:20. And many of them said: He hath a devil and is mad. Why hear you
him?

10:21. Others said: These are not the words of one that hath a devil.
Can a devil open the eyes of the blind?

10:22. And it was the feast of the dedication at Jerusalem: and it was
winter.

10:23. And Jesus walked in the temple, in Solomon's porch.

10:24. The Jews therefore came round about him and said to him: How long
dost thou hold our souls in suspense? If thou be the Christ, tell us
plainly.

10:25. Jesus answered them: I speak to you, and you believe not: the
works that I do in the name of my Father, they give testimony of me.

10:26. But you do not believe, because you are not of my sheep.

10:27. My sheep hear my voice. And I know them: and they follow me.

10:28. And I give them life everlasting: and they shall not perish for
ever. And no man shall pluck them out of my hand.

10:29. That which my Father hath given me is greater than all: and no
one can snatch them out of the hand of my Father.

10:30. I and the Father are one.

I and the Father are one... That is, one divine nature, but two distinct
persons.

10:31. The Jews then took up stones to stone him.

10:32. Jesus answered them: Many good works I have shewed you from my
Father. For which of those works do you stone me?

10:33. The Jews answered him: For a good work we stone thee not, but for
blasphemy: and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God.

10:34. Jesus answered them: Is it not written in your law: I said, you
are gods?

10:35. If he called them gods to whom the word of God was spoken; and
the scripture cannot be broken:

10:36. Do you say of him whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into
the world: Thou blasphemest; because I said: I am the Son of God?

10:37. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not.

10:38. But if I do, though you will not believe me, believe the works:
that you may know and believe that the Father is in me and I in the
Father.

10:39. They sought therefore to take him: and he escaped out of their
hands.

10:40. And he went again beyond the Jordan, into that place where John
was baptizing first. And there he abode.

10:41. And many resorted to him: and they said: John indeed did no sign.

10:42. But all things whatsoever John said of this man were true.  And
many believed n him.

John Chapter 11

Christ raises Lazarus to life. The rulers resolve to put him to death.

11:1. Now there was a certain man sick, named Lazarus, of Bethania, of
the town of Mary and of Martha her sister.

11:2. (And Mary was she that anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped
his feet with her hair: whose brother Lazarus was sick.)

11:3. His sisters therefore sent to him, saying: Lord, behold, he whom
thou lovest is sick.

11:4. And Jesus hearing it, said to them: This sickness is not unto
death, but for the glory of God: that the Son of God may be glorified by
it.

11:5. Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister Mary and Lazarus.

11:6. When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he still remained in
the same place two days.

11:7. Then after that, he said to his disciples: Let us go into Judea
again.

11:8. The disciples say to him: Rabbi, the Jews but now sought to stone
thee. And goest thou thither again?

11:9. Jesus answered: Are there not twelve hours of the day? If a man
walk in the day he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this
world:

11:10. But if he walk in the night, he stumbleth, because the light is
not in him.

11:11. These things he said; and after that he said to them: Lazarus our
friend sleepeth: but I go that I may awake him out of sleep.

11:12. His disciples therefore said: Lord, if he sleep, he shall do
well.

11:13. But Jesus spoke of his death: and they thought that he spoke of
the repose of sleep.

11:14. Then therefore Jesus said to them plainly: Lazarus is dead.

11:15. And I am glad, for your sakes; that I was not there, that you may
believe. But, let us go to him.

11:16. Thomas therefore, who is called Didymus, said to his fellow
disciples: Let us also go, that we may die with him.

11:17. Jesus therefore came: and found that he had been four days
already in the grave.

11:18. (Now Bethania was near Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off.)

11:19. And many of the Jews were come to Martha and Mary, to comfort
them concerning their brother.

11:20. Martha therefore, as soon as she heard that Jesus was come, went
to meet him: but Mary sat at home.

11:21. Martha therefore said to Jesus: Lord, if thou hadst been here, my
brother had not died.

11:22. But now also I know that whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God
will give it thee.

11:23. Jesus saith to her: Thy brother shall rise again.

11:24. Martha saith to him: I know that he shall rise again, in the
resurrection at the last day.

11:25. Jesus said to her: I am the resurrection and the life: he that
believeth in me, although he be dead, shall live:

11:26. And every one that liveth and believeth in me shall not die for
ever. Believest thou this?

11:27. She saith to him: Yea, Lord, I have believed that thou art
Christ, the Son of the living God, who art come into this world.

11:28. And when she had said these things, she went and called her
sister Mary secretly, saying: The master is come and calleth for thee.

11:29. She, as soon as she heard this, riseth quickly and cometh to him.

11:30. For Jesus was not yet come into the town: but he was still in
that place where Martha had met him.

11:31. The Jews therefore, who were with her in the house and comforted
her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up speedily and went out,
followed her, saying: She goeth to the grave to weep there.

11:32. When Mary therefore was come where Jesus was, seeing him, she
fell down at his feet and saith to him. Lord, if thou hadst been here,
my brother had not died.

11:33. Jesus, therefore, when he saw her weeping, and the Jews that were
come with her weeping, groaned in the spirit and troubled himself,

11:34. And said: Where have you laid him? They say to him: Lord, come
and see.

11:35. And Jesus wept.

11:36. The Jews therefore said: Behold how he loved him.

11:37. But some of them said: Could not he that opened the eyes of the
man born blind have caused that this man should not die?

11:38. Jesus therefore again groaning in himself, cometh to the
sepulchre. Now it was a cave; and a stone was laid over it.

11:39. Jesus saith: Take away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that
was dead, saith to him: Lord, by this time he stinketh, for he is now of
four days.

11:40. Jesus saith to her: Did not I say to thee that if thou believe,
thou shalt see the glory of God?

11:41. They took therefore the stone away. And Jesus lifting up his
eyes, said: Father, I give thee thanks that thou hast heard me.

11:42. And I knew that thou hearest me always: but because of the people
who stand about have I said it, that they may believe that thou hast
sent me.

11:43. When he had said these things, he cried with a loud voice:
Lazarus, come forth.

11:44. And presently he that had been dead came forth, bound feet and
hands with winding bands. And his face was bound about with a napkin.
Jesus said to them: Loose him and let him go.

11:45. Many therefore of the Jews, who were come to Mary and Martha and
had seen the things that Jesus did, believed in him.

11:46. But some of them went to the Pharisees and told them the things
that Jesus had done.

11:47. The chief priests, therefore, and the Pharisees gathered a
council and said: What do we, for this man doth many miracles?

11:48. If we let him alone so, all will believe in him; and the Romans
will come, and take away our place and nation.

11:49. But one of them, named Caiphas, being the high priest that year,
said to them: You know nothing.

11:50. Neither do you consider that it is expedient for you that one man
should die for the people and that the whole nation perish not.

11:51. And this he spoke not of himself: but being the high priest of
that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for the nation.

11:52. And not only for the nation, but to gather together in one the
children of God that were dispersed.

11:53. From that day therefore they devised to put him to death.

11:54. Wherefore Jesus walked no more openly among the Jews: but he went
into a country near the desert, unto a city that is called Ephrem. And
there he abode with his disciples.

11:55. And the pasch of the Jews was at hand: and many from the country
went up to Jerusalem, before the pasch, to purify themselves.

11:56. They sought therefore for Jesus; and they discoursed one with
another, standing in the temple: What think you that he is not come to
the festival day? And the chief priests and Pharisees had given a
commandment that, if any man knew where he was, he should tell, that
they might apprehend him.

John Chapter 12

The anointing of Christ's feet. His riding into Jerusalem upon an ass. A
voice from heaven.

12:1. Jesus therefore, six days before the pasch, came to Bethania,
where Lazarus had been dead, whom Jesus raised to life.

12:2. And they made him a supper there: and Martha served. But Lazarus
was one of them that were at table with him.

12:3. Mary therefore took a pound of ointment of right spikenard, of
great price, and anointed the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet with her
hair. And the house was filled with the odour of the ointment.

12:4. Then one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, he that was about to
betray him, said:

12:5. Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence and given
to the poor?

12:6. Now he said this not because he cared for the poor; but because he
was a thief and, having the purse, carried the things that were put
therein.

12:7. Jesus therefore said: Let her alone, that she may keep it against
the day of my burial.

12:8. For the poor you have always with you: but me you have not always.

See the annotation of St. Matt. 26. 11.

12:9. A great multitude therefore of the Jews knew that he was there;
and they came, not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see
Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.

12:10. But the chief priests thought to kill Lazarus also:

12:11. Because many of the Jews, by reason of him, went away and
believed in Jesus.

12:12. And on the next day, a great multitude that was come to the
festival day, when they had heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,

12:13. Took branches of palm trees and went forth to meet him and cried
Hosanna. Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, the king of
Israel.

12:14. And Jesus found a young ass and sat upon it, as it is written:

12:15. Fear not, daughter of Sion: behold thy king cometh, sitting on an
ass's colt.

12:16. These things his disciples did not know at the first: but when
Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written
of him and that they had done these things to him.

12:17. The multitude therefore gave testimony, which was with him, when
he called Lazarus out of the grave and raised him from the dead.

12:18. For which reason also the people came to meet him, because they
heard that he had done this miracle.

12:19. The Pharisees therefore said among themselves: Do you see that we
prevail nothing? Behold, the whole world is gone after him.

12:20. Now there were certain Gentiles among them, who came up to adore
on the festival day.

12:21. These therefore came to Philip, who was of Bethsaida of Galilee,
and desired him, saying: Sir, we would see Jesus.

12:22. Philip cometh and telleth Andrew. Again Andrew and Philip told
Jesus.

12:23. But Jesus answered them, saying: The hour is come that the Son of
man should be glorified.

12:24. Amen, amen, I say to you, unless the grain of wheat falling into
the ground die,

12:25. Itself remaineth alone. But if it die it bringeth forth much
fruit. He that loveth his life shall lose it and he that hateth his life
in this world keepeth it unto life eternal.

12:26. If any man minister to me, let him follow me: and where I am,
there also shall my minister be. If any man minister to me, him will my
Father honour.

12:27. Now is my soul troubled. And what shall I say? Father, save me
from this hour. But for this cause I came unto this hour.

12:28. Father, glorify thy name. A voice therefore came from heaven: I
have both glorified it and will glorify it again.

12:29. The multitude therefore that stood and heard said that it
thundered. Others said: An angel spoke to him.

12:30. Jesus answered and said: This voice came not because of me, but
for your sakes.

12:31. Now is the judgment of the world: now shall the prince of this
world be cast out.

12:32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all things to
myself.

12:33. (Now this he said, signifying what death he should die.)

12:34. The multitude answered him: We have heard out of the law that
Christ abideth for ever. And how sayest thou: The Son of man must be
lifted up? Who is this Son of man?

12:35. Jesus therefore said to them: Yet a little while, the light is
among you. Walk whilst you have the light, and the darkness overtake you
not. And he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither be goeth.

12:36. Whilst you have the light, believe in the light, that you may be
the children of light. These things Jesus spoke: and he went away and
hid himself from them.

12:37. And whereas he had done so many miracles before them, they
believed not in him:

12:38. That the saying of Isaias the prophet might be fulfilled, which
he said: Lord, who hath believed our hearing? And to whom hath the arm
of the Lord been revealed?

12:39. Therefore they could not believe, because Isaias said again:

They could not believe... Because they would not, saith St. Augustine,
Tract. 33, in Joan. See the annotation, St. Mark 4. 12.

12:40. He hath blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, that they
should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart and be
converted: and I should heal them.

12:41. These things said Isaias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of
him.

12:42. However, many of the chief men also believed in him: but because
of the Pharisees they did not confess him, that they might not be cast
out of the synagogue.

12:43. For they loved the glory of men more than the glory of God.

12:44. But Jesus cried and said: He that believeth in me doth not
believe in me, but in him that sent me.

12:45. And he that seeth me, seeth him that sent me.

12:46. I am come, a light into the world, that whosoever believeth in me
may not remain in darkness.

12:47. And if any man hear my words and keep them not, I do not judge
him for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.

12:48. He that despiseth me and receiveth not my words hath one that
judgeth him. The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in
the last day.

12:49. For I have not spoken of myself: but the Father who sent me, he
gave me commandment what I should say and what I should speak.

12:50. And I know that his commandment is life everlasting. The things
therefore that I speak, even as the Father said unto me, so do I speak.

John Chapter 13

Christ washes his disciples' feet. The treason of Judas. The new
commandment of love.

13:1. Before the festival day of the pasch, Jesus knowing that his hour
was come, that he should pass out of this world to the Father: having
loved his own who were in the world, he loved them unto the end.

Before the festival day of the pasch... This was the fourth and last
pasch of the ministry of Christ, and according to the common
computation, was in the thirty-third year of our Lord: and in the year
of the world 4036. Some chronologers are of opinion that our Saviour
suffered in the thirty-seventh year of his age: but these different
opinions on this subject are of no consequence.

13:2. And when supper was done (the devil having now put into the heart
of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, to betray him),

13:3. Knowing that the Father had given him all things into his hands
and that he came from God and goeth to God,

13:4. He riseth from supper and layeth aside his garments and, having
taken a towel, girded himself.

13:5. After that, he putteth water into a basin and began to wash the
feet of the disciples and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was
girded.

13:6. He cometh therefore to Simon Peter. And Peter saith to him: Lord,
dost thou wash my feet?

13:7. Jesus answered and said to him: What I do, thou knowest not now;
but thou shalt know hereafter.

13:8. Peter saith to him: Thou shalt never wash my feet, Jesus answered
him: If I wash thee not, thou shalt have no part with me.

13:9. Simon Peter saith to him: Lord, not only my feet, but also my
hands and my head.

13:10. Jesus saith to him: He that is washed needeth not but to wash his
feet, but is clean wholly. And you are clean, but not all.

13:11. For he knew who he was that would betray him; therefore he said:
You are not all clean.

13:12. Then after he had washed their feet and taken his garments, being
set down again, he said to them: Know you what I have done to you?

13:13. You call me Master and Lord. And you say well: for so I am.

13:14. If then I being your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; you
also ought to wash one another's feet.

13:15. For I have given you an example, that as I have done to you, so
you do also.

13:16. Amen, amen, I say to you: The servant is not greater than his
lord: neither is the apostle greater than he that sent him.

13:17. If you know these things, you shall be blessed if you do them.

13:18. I speak not of you all: I know whom I have chosen. But that the
scripture may be fulfilled: He that eateth bread with me shall lift up
his heel against me,

13:19. At present I tell you, before it come to pass: that when it shall
come to pass, you may believe that I am he.

13:20. Amen, amen, I say to you, he that receiveth whomsoever I send
receiveth me: and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.

13:21. When Jesus had said these things, he was troubled in spirit; and
he testified, and said: Amen, amen, I say to you, one of you shall
betray me.

13:22. The disciples therefore looked one upon another, doubting of whom
he spoke.

13:23. Now there was leaning on Jesus' bosom one of his disciples, whom
Jesus loved.

13:24. Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him and said to him: Who is it
of whom he speaketh?

13:25. He therefore, leaning on the breast of Jesus, saith to him: Lord,
who is it?

13:26. Jesus answered: He it is to whom I shall reach bread dipped. And
when he had dipped the bread, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, the son of
Simon.

13:27. And after the morsel, Satan entered into him. And Jesus said to
him: That which thou dost, do quickly.

That which thou dost, do quickly... It is not a license, much less a
command, to go about his treason: but a signification to him that Christ
would not hinder or resist what he was about, do it as soon as he
pleased: but was both ready and desirous to suffer for our redemption.

13:28. Now no man at the table knew to what purpose he said this unto
him.

13:29. For some thought, because Judas had the purse, that Jesus had
said to him: Buy those things which we have need of for the festival
day: or that he should give something to the poor.

13:30. He therefore, having received the morsel, went out immediately.
And it was night.

13:31. When he therefore was gone out, Jesus said: Now is the Son of man
glorified; and God is glorified in him.

13:32. If God be glorified in him, God also will glorify him in himself:
and immediately will he glorify him.

13:33. Little children, yet a little while I am with you. You shall seek
me. And as I said to the Jews: Whither I go you cannot come; so I say to
you now.

13:34. A new commandment I give unto you: That you love one another, as
I have loved you, that you also love one another.

13:35. By this shall all men know that you are my disciples, if you have
love one for another.

13:36. Simon Peter saith to him: Lord, whither goest thou? Jesus
answered: Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now: but thou shalt
follow hereafter.

13:37. Peter saith to him: Why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down
my life for thee.

13:38. Jesus answered him: Wilt thou lay down thy life for me?  Amen,
amen, I say to thee, the cock shall not crow, till thou deny me thrice.

John Chapter 14

Christ's discourse after his last supper.

14:1. Let not your heart be troubled. You believe in God: believe also
in me.

14:2. In my Father's house there are many mansions. If not, I would have
told you: because I go to prepare a place for you.

14:3. And if I shall go and prepare a place for you, I will come again
and will take you to myself: that where I am, you also may be.

14:4. And whither I go you know: and the way you know.

14:5. Thomas saith to him: Lord, we know not whither thou goest.  And
how can we know the way?

14:6. Jesus saith to him: I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No
man cometh to the Father, but by me.

14:7. If you had known me, you would without doubt have known my Father
also: and from henceforth you shall know him. And you have seen him.

14:8. Philip saith to him: Lord, shew us the Father; and it is enough
for us.

14:9. Jesus saith to him: Have I been so long a time with you and have
you not known me? Philip, he that seeth me seeth the Father also. How
sayest thou: Shew us the Father?

14:10. Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father in me?
The words that I speak to you, I speak not of myself.  But the Father
who abideth in me, he doth the works.

14:11. Believe you not that I am in the Father and the Father in me?

14:12. Otherwise believe for the very works' sake. Amen, amen, I say to
you, he that believeth in me, the works that I do, he also shall do: and
greater than these shall he do.

14:13. Because I go to the Father: and whatsoever you shall ask the
Father in my name, that will I do: that the Father may be glorified in
the Son.

14:14. If you shall ask me any thing in my name, that I will do.

14:15. If you love me, keep my commandments.

14:16. And I will ask the Father: and he shall give you another
Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever:

Paraclete... That is, a comforter: or also an advocate; inasmuch as by
inspiring prayer, he prays, as it were, in us, and pleads for us. For
ever... Hence it is evident that this Spirit of Truth was not only
promised to the persons of the apostles, but also to their successors
through all generations.

14:17. The spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it
seeth him not, nor knoweth him. But you shall know him; because he shall
abide with you and shall be in you.

14:18. I will not leave you orphans: I will come to you.

14:19. Yet a little while and the world seeth me no more. But you see
me: because I live, and you shall live.

14:20. In that day you shall know that I am in my Father: and you in me,
and I in you.

14:21. He that hath my commandments and keepeth them; he it is that
loveth me. And he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father: and I will
love him and will manifest myself to him.

14:22. Judas saith to him, not the Iscariot: Lord, how is it that thou
wilt manifest thyself to us, and not to the world?

14:23. Jesus answered and said to him: If any one love me, he will keep
my word. And my Father will love him and we will come to him and will
make our abode with him.

14:24. He that loveth me not keepeth not my words. And the word which
you have heard is not mine; but the Father's who sent me.

14:25. These things have I spoken to you, abiding with you.

14:26. But the Paraclete, the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my name, he will teach you all things and bring all things to your mind,
whatsoever I shall have said to you.

Teach you all things... Here the Holy Ghost is promised to the apostles
and their successors, particularly, in order to teach them all truth,
and to preserve them from error.

14:27. Peace I leave with you: my peace I give unto you: not as the
world giveth, do I give unto you. Let not your heart be troubled: nor
let it be afraid.

14:28. You have heard that I said to you: I go away, and I come unto
you. If you loved me you would indeed be glad, because I go to the
Father: for the Father is greater than I.

For the Father is greater than I... It is evident, that Christ our Lord
speaks here of himself as he is made man: for as God he is equal to the
Father. (See Phil. 2.) Any difficulty of understanding the meaning of
these words will vanish, when the relative circumstances of the text
here are considered: for Christ being at this time shortly to suffer
death, signified to his apostles his human nature by these very words:
for as God he could not die. And therefore as he was both God and man,
it must follow that according to his humanity he was to die, which the
apostles were soon to see and believe, as he expresses, ver. 29. And now
I have told you before it come to pass: that when it shall come to pass,
you may believe.

14:29. And now I have told you before it come to pass: that when it
shall come to pass, you may believe.

14:30. I will not now speak many things with you. For the prince of this
world: cometh: and in me he hath not any thing.

14:31. But that the world may know that I love the Father: and as the
Father hath given me commandments, so do I. Arise, let us go hence.

John Chapter 15

A continuation of Christ's discourse to his disciples.

15:1. I am the true vine: and my Father is the husbandman.

15:2. Every branch in me that beareth not fruit, he will take away: and
every one that beareth fruit, he will purge it, that it may bring forth
more fruit.

15:3. Now you are clean, by reason of the word which I have spoken to
you.

15:4. Abide in me: and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of
itself, unless it abide in the vine, so neither can you, unless you
abide in me.

15:5. I am the vine: you the branches. He that abideth in me, and I in
him, the same beareth much fruit: for without me you can do nothing.

15:6. If any one abide not in me, he shall be cast forth as a branch and
shall wither: and they shall gather him up and cast him into the fire:
and he burneth.

15:7. If you abide in me and my words abide in you, you shall ask
whatever you will: and it shall be done unto you.

15:8. In this is my Father glorified: that you bring forth very much
fruit and become my disciples.

15:9. As the Father hath loved me, I also have loved you. Abide in my
love.

15:10. If you keep my commandments, you shall abide in my love: as I
also have kept my Father's commandments and do abide in his love.

15:11. These things I have spoken to you, that my joy may be in you, and
your joy may be filled.

15:12. This is my commandment, that you love one another, as I have
loved you.

15:13. Greater love than this no man hath, that a man lay down his life
for his friends.

15:14. You are my friends, if you do the things that I command you.

15:15. I will not now call you servants: for the servant knoweth not
what his lord doth. But I have called you friends: because all things,
whatsoever I have heard of my Father, I have made known to you.

15:16. You have not chosen me: but I have chosen you; and have appointed
you, that you should go and should bring forth fruit; and your fruit
should remain: that whatsoever you shall ask of the Father in my name,
he may give it you.

15:17. These things I command you, that you love one another.

15:18. If the world hate you, know ye that it hath hated me before you.

15:19. If you had been of the world, the world would love its own: but
because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hateth you.

15:20. Remember my word that I said to you: The servant is not greater
than his master. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute
you. If they have kept my word, they will keep yours also.

15:21. But all these things they will do to you for my name's sake:
because they know not him that sent me.

15:22. If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have sin:
but now they have no excuse for their sin.

15:23. He that hateth me hateth my Father also.

15:24. If I had not done among them the works that no other man hath
done, they would not have sin: but now they have both seen and hated
both me and my Father.

15:25. But that the word may be fulfilled which is written in their law:
they hated me without cause.

15:26. But when the Paraclete cometh, whom I will send you from the
Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceedeth from the Father, he shall
give testimony of me.

Whom I will send... This proves, against the modern Greeks, that the
Holy Ghost proceedeth from the Son, as well as from the Father:
otherwise he could not be sent by the Son.

15:27. And you shall give testimony, because you are with me from the
beginning.

John Chapter 16

The conclusion of Christ's last discourse to his disciples.

16:1. These things have I spoken to you things have I spoken to you that
you may not be scandalized.

16:2. They will put you out of the synagogues: yea, the hour cometh,
that whosoever killeth you will think that he doth a service to God.

16:3. And these things will they do to you; because they have not known
the Father nor me.

16:4. But these things I have told you, that when the hour shall come,
you may remember that I told you of them.

16:5. But I told you not these things from the beginning, because I was
with you. And now I go to him that sent me, and none of you asketh me:
Whither goest thou?

16:6. But because I have spoken these things to you, sorrow hath filled
your heart.

16:7. But I tell you the truth: it is expedient to you that I go.  For
if I go not, the Paraclete will not come to you: but if I go, I will
send him to you.

16:8. And when he is come, he will convince the world of sin and of
justice and of judgment.

He will convince the world of sin, etc... The Holy Ghost, by his coming
brought over many thousands, first, to a sense of their sin in not
believing in Christ. Secondly, to a conviction of the justice of Christ,
now sitting at the right hand of his Father. And thirdly, to a right
apprehension of the judgment prepared for them that choose to follow
Satan, who is already judged and condemned.

16:9. Of sin: because they believed not in me.

16:10. And of justice: because I go to the Father: and you shall see me
no longer.

16:11. And of judgment: because the prince of this world is already
judged.

16:12. I have yet many things to say to you: but you cannot bear them
now.

16:13. But when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will teach you all
truth. For he shall not speak of himself: but what things soever he
shall hear, he shall speak. And the things that are to come, he shall
shew you.

Will teach you all truth... See the annotation on chap. 14. ver. 26.

16:14. He shall glorify me: because he shall receive of mine and shall
shew it to you.

16:15. All things whatsoever the Father hath are mine. Therefore I said
that he shall receive of me and shew it to you.

16:16. A little while, and now you shall not see me: and again a little
while, and you shall see me: because I go to the Father.

16:17. Then some of his disciples said one to another: What is this that
he saith to us: A little while, and you shall not see me: and again a
little while, and you shall see me, and, Because I go to the Father?

16:18. They said therefore: What is this that he saith, A little while?
We know not what he speaketh.

16:19. And Jesus knew that they had a mind to ask him. And he said to
them: Of this do you inquire among yourselves, because I said: A little
while, and you shall not see me; and again a little while, and you shall
see me?

16:20. Amen, amen, I say to you, that you shall lament and weep, but the
world shall rejoice: and you shall be made sorrowful, but your sorrow
shall be turned into joy.

16:21. A woman, when she is in labour, hath sorrow, because her hour is
come; but when she hath brought forth the child, she remembereth no more
the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.

16:22. So also you now indeed have sorrow: but I will see you again and
your heart shall rejoice. And your joy no man shall take from you.

16:23. And in that day you shall not ask me any thing. Amen, amen, I say
to you: if you ask the Father any thing in my name, he will give it you.

16:24. Hitherto, you have not asked any thing in my name. Ask, and you
shall receive; that your joy may be full.

16:25. These things I have spoken to you in proverbs. The hour cometh
when I will no longer speak to you in proverbs, but will shew you
plainly of the Father.

16:26. In that day, you shall ask in my name: and I say not to you that
I will ask the Father for you.

16:27. For the Father himself loveth you, because you have loved me and
have believed that I came out from God.

16:28. I came forth from the Father and am come into the world: again I
leave the world and I go to the Father.

16:29. His disciples say to him: Behold, now thou speakest plainly and
speakest no proverb.

16:30. Now we know that thou knowest all things and thou needest not
that any man should ask thee. By this we believe that thou camest forth
from God.

16:31. Jesus answered them: Do you now believe?

16:32. Behold, the hour cometh, and it is now come, that you shall be
scattered every man to his own and shall leave me alone. And yet I am
not alone, because the Father is with me.

16:33. These things I have spoken to you, that in me you may have peace.
In the world you shall have distress. But have confidence. I have
overcome the world.

John Chapter 17

Christ's prayer for his disciples.

17:1. These things Jesus spoke: and lifting up his eyes to heaven, he
said: the hour is come. Glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee.

17:2. As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he may give
eternal life to all whom thou hast given him.

17:3. Now this is eternal life: That they may know thee, the only true
God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.

17:4. I have glorified thee on the earth; I have finished the work which
thou gavest me to do.

17:5. And now glorify thou me, O Father, with thyself, with the glory
which I had, before the world was, with thee.

17:6. I have manifested thy name to the men whom thou hast given me out
of the world. Thine they were: and to me thou gavest them. And they have
kept thy word.

17:7. Now they have known that all things which thou hast given me are
from thee:

17:8. Because the words which thou gavest me, I have given to them. And
they have received them and have known in very deed that I came out from
thee: and they have believed that thou didst send me.

17:9. I pray for them. I pray not for the world, but for them whom thou
hast given me: because they are thine.

17:10. And all my things are thine, and thine are mine: and I am
glorified in them.

17:11. And now I am not in the world, and these are in the world, and I
come to thee. Holy Father, keep them in thy name whom thou hast given
me: that they may be one, as we also are.

17:12. While I was with them, I kept them in thy name. Those whom thou
gavest me have I kept: and none of them is lost, but the son of
perdition: that the scripture may be fulfilled.

17:13. And now I come to thee: and these things I speak in the world,
that they may have my joy filled in themselves.

17:14. I have given them thy word, and the world hath hated them:
because they are not of the world, as I also am not of the world.

17:15. I pray not that thou shouldst take them out of the world, but
that thou shouldst keep them from evil.

17:16. They are not of the world, as I also am not of the world.

17:17. Sanctify them in truth. Thy word is truth.

17:18. As thou hast sent me into the world, I also have sent them into
the world.

17:19. And for them do I sanctify myself, that they also may be
sanctified in truth.

17:20. And not for them only do I pray, but for them also who through
their word shall believe in me.

17:21. That they all may be one, as thou, Father, in me, and I in thee;
that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou
hast sent me.

17:22. And the glory which thou hast given me, I have given to them:
that, they may be one, as we also are one.

17:23. I in them, and thou in me: that they may be made perfect in one:
and the world may know that thou hast sent me and hast loved them, as
thou hast also loved me.

17:24. Father, I will that where I am, they also whom thou hast given me
may be with me: that they may see my glory which thou hast given me,
because thou hast loved me before the creation of the world.

17:25. Just Father, the world hath not known thee: but I have known
thee. And these have known that thou hast sent me.

17:26. And I have made known thy name to them and will make it known:
that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in
them.

John Chapter 18

The history of the passion of Christ.

18:1. When Jesus had said these things, he went forth with his disciples
over the brook Cedron, where there was a garden, into which he entered
with his disciples.

18:2. And Judas also, who betrayed him, knew the place: because Jesus
had often resorted thither together with his disciples.

18:3. Judas therefore having received a band of soldiers and servants
from the chief priests and the Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns
and torches and weapons.

18:4. Jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him,
went forth and said to them: Whom seek ye?

18:5. They answered him: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith to them: I am
he. And Judas also, who betrayed him, stood with them.

18:6. As soon therefore as he had said to them: I am he; they went
backward and fell to the ground.

18:7. Again therefore he asked them: Whom seek ye? And they said: Jesus
of Nazareth.

18:8. Jesus answered: I have told you that I am he. If therefore you
seek me, let these go their way,

18:9. That the word might be fulfilled which he said: Of them whom thou
hast given me, I have not lost any one.

18:10. Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it and struck the servant
of the high priest and cut off his right ear. And the name of thee
servant was Malchus.

18:11. Jesus therefore said to Peter: Put up thy sword into the
scabbard. The chalice which my father hath given me, shall I not drink
it?

18:12. Then the band and the tribune and the servants of the Jews took
Jesus and bound him.

18:13. And they led him away to Annas first, for he was father-in-law to
Caiphas, who was the high priest of that year.

18:14. Now Caiphas was he who had given the counsel to the Jews: That it
was expedient that one man should die for the people.

18:15. And Simon Peter followed Jesus: and so did another disciple. And
that disciple was known to the high priest and went in with Jesus into
the court of the high priest.

18:16. But Peter stood at the door without. The other disciple
therefore, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the
portress and brought in Peter.

18:17. The maid therefore that was portress saith to Peter: Art not thou
also one of this man's disciple? He saith I am not.

18:18. Now the servants and ministers stood at a fire of coals, because
it was cold, and warmed themselves. And with them was Peter also,
standing and warming himself.

18:19. The high priest therefore asked Jesus of his disciples and of his
doctrine.

18:20. Jesus answered him: I have spoken openly to the world. I have
always taught in the synagogue and in the temple, whither all the Jews
resort: and in secret I have spoken nothing.

18:21. Why askest thou me? Ask them who have heard what I have spoken
unto them. Behold they know what things I have said.

18:22. And when he had said these things, one of the servants standing
by gave Jesus a blow, saying: Answerest thou the high priest so?

18:23. Jesus answered him: If I have spoken evil, give testimony of the
evil; but if well, why strikest thou me?

18:24. And Annas sent him bound to Caiphas the high priest.

18:25. And Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. They said
therefore to him: Art not thou also one of his disciples?  He denied it
and said: I am not.

18:26. One of the servants of the high priest (a kinsman to him whose
ear Peter cut off) saith to him: Did not I see thee in the garden with
him?

18:27. Again therefore Peter denied: and immediately the cock crew.

18:28. Then they led Jesus from Caiphas to the governor's hall.  And it
was morning: and they went not into the hall, that they might not be
defiled, but that they might eat the pasch.

18:29. Pilate therefore went out to them, and said: What accusation
bring you against this man?

18:30. They answered and said to him: If he were not a malefactor, we
would not have delivered him up to thee.

18:31. Pilate therefore said to them: Take him you, and judge him
according to your law. The Jews therefore said to him: It is not lawful
for us to put any man to death.

18:32. That the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he said,
signifying what death he should die.

18:33. Pilate therefore went into the hall again and called Jesus and
said to him: Art thou the king of the Jews?

18:34. Jesus answered: Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or have others
told it thee of me?

18:35. Pilate answered: Am I a Jew? Thy own nation and the chief priests
have delivered thee up to me. What hast thou done?

18:36. Jesus answered: My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom
were of this world, my servants would certainly strive that I should not
be delivered to the Jews: but now my kingdom is not from hence.

18:37. Pilate therefore said to him: Art thou a king then? Jesus
answered: Thou sayest that I am a king. For this was I born, and for
this came I into the world; that I should give testimony to the truth.
Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.

18:38. Pilate saith to him: What is truth? And when he said this, he
went out again to the Jews and saith to them: I find no cause in him.

18:39. But you have a custom that I should release one unto you at the
Pasch. Will you, therefore, that I release unto you the king of the
Jews?

18:40. Then cried they all again, saying: Not this man, but Barabbas.
Now Barabbas was a robber.

John Chapter 19

The continuation of the history of the Passion of Christ.

19:1. Then therefore Pilate took Jesus and scourged him.

19:2. And the soldiers platting a crown of thorns, put it upon his head:
and they put on him a purple garment.

19:3. And they came to him and said: Hail, king of the Jews. And they
gave him blows.

19:4. Pilate therefore went forth again and saith to them: Behold, I
bring him forth unto you, that you may know that I find no cause in him.

19:5. (Jesus therefore came forth, bearing the crown of thorns and the
purple garment.) And he saith to them: Behold the Man.

19:6. When the chief priests, therefore, and the servants had seen him,
they cried out, saying: Crucify him, Crucify him.  Pilate saith to them:
Take him you, and crucify him: for I find no cause in him.

19:7. The Jews answered him: We have a law; and according to the law he
ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.

19:8. When Pilate therefore had heard this saying, he feared the more.

19:9. And he entered into the hall again; and he said to Jesus: Whence
art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.

19:10. Pilate therefore saith to him: Speakest thou not to me?  Knowest
thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and I have power to release
thee?

19:11. Jesus answered: Thou shouldst not have any power against me,
unless it were given thee from above. Therefore, he that hath delivered
me to thee hath the greater sin.

19:12. And from henceforth Pilate sought to release him. But the Jews
cried out, saying: If thou release this man, thou art not Caesar's
friend. For whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar.

19:13. Now when Pilate had heard these words, he brought Jesus forth and
sat down in the judgment seat, in the place that is called Lithostrotos,
and in Hebrew Gabbatha.

19:14. And it was the parasceve of the pasch, about the sixth hour: and
he saith to the Jews: Behold your king.

The parasceve of the pasch... That is, the day before the paschal
sabbath. The eve of every sabbath was called the parasceve, or day of
preparation. But this was the eve of a high sabbath, viz., that which
fell in the paschal week.

19:15. But they cried out: Away with him: Away with him: Crucify him.
Pilate saith to them: shall I crucify your king? The chief priests
answered: We have no king but Caesar.

19:16. Then therefore he delivered him to them to be crucified.  And
they took Jesus and led him forth.

19:17. And bearing his own cross, he went forth to the place which is
called Calvary, but in Hebrew Golgotha.

19:18. Where they crucified him, and with him two others, one on each
side, and Jesus in the midst.

19:19. And Pilate wrote a title also: and he put it upon the cross. And
the writing was: JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.

19:20. This title therefore many of the Jews did read: because the place
where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city. And it was written in
Hebrew, in Greek, and in Latin.

19:21. Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate: Write not: The
King of the Jews. But that he said: I am the King of the Jews.

19:22. Pilate answered: What I have written, I have written.

19:23. The soldiers therefore, when they had crucified him, took his
garments, (and they made four parts, to every soldier a part) and also
his coat. Now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.

19:24. They said then one to another: Let us not cut it but let us cast
lots for it, whose it shall be; that the scripture might be fulfilled,
saying: They have parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture
they have cast lots. And the soldiers indeed did these things.

19:25. Now there stood by the cross of Jesus, his mother and his
mother's sister, Mary of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen.

19:26. When Jesus therefore had seen his mother and the disciple
standing whom he loved, he saith to his mother: Woman, behold thy son.

19:27. After that, he saith to the disciple: Behold thy mother.  And
from that hour, the disciple took her to his own.

19:28. Afterwards, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished,
that the scripture might be fulfilled, said: I thirst.

19:29. Now there was a vessel set there, full of vinegar. And they,
putting a sponge full of vinegar about hyssop, put it to his mouth.

19:30. Jesus therefore, when he had taken the vinegar, said: It is
consummated. And bowing his head, he gave up the ghost.

19:31. Then the Jews (because it was the parasceve), that the bodies
might not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day (for that was a great
sabbath day), besought Pilate that their legs might be broken: and that
they might be taken away.

19:32. The soldiers therefore came: and they broke the legs of the
first, and of the other that was crucified with him.

19:33. But after they were come to Jesus, when they saw that he was
already dead, they did not break his legs.

19:34. But one of the soldiers with a spear opened his side: and
immediately there came out blood and water.

19:35. And he that saw it hath given testimony: and his testimony is
true. And he knoweth that he saith true: that you also may believe.

19:36. For these things were done that the scripture might be fulfilled:
You shall not break a bone of him.

19:37. And again another scripture saith: They shall look on him whom
they pierced.

19:38. And after these things, Joseph of Arimathea (because he was a
disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews), besought Pilate
that he might take away the body of Jesus.  And Pilate gave leave. He
came therefore and took away the body of Jesus.

19:39. And Nicodemus also came (he who at the first came to Jesus by
night), bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound
weight.

19:40. They took therefore the body of Jesus and bound it in linen
cloths, with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury.

19:41. Now there was in the place where he was crucified a garden: and
in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein no man yet had been laid.

19:42. There, therefore, because of the parasceve of the Jews, they laid
Jesus: because the sepulchre was nigh at hand.

John Chapter 20

Christ's resurrection and manifestation to his disciples.

20:1. And on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalen cometh early, when
it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre: and she saw the stone taken away
from the sepulchre.

20:2. She ran therefore and cometh to Simon Peter and to the other
disciple whom Jesus loved and saith to them: They have taken away the
Lord out of the sepulchre: and we know not where they have laid him.

20:3. Peter therefore went out, and the other disciple: and they came to
the sepulchre.

20:4. And they both ran together: and that other disciple did outrun
Peter and came first to the sepulchre.

20:5. And when he stooped down, he saw the linen cloths lying: but yet
he went not in.

20:6. Then cometh Simon Peter, following him, and went into the
sepulchre: and saw the linen cloths lying,

20:7. And the napkin that had been about his head, not lying with the
linen cloths, but apart, wrapped up into one place.

20:8. Then that other disciple also went in, who came first to the
sepulchre: and he saw and believed.

20:9. For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again
from the dead.

20:10. The disciples therefore departed again to their home.

20:11. But Mary stood at the sepulchre without, weeping. Now as she was
weeping, she stooped down and looked into the sepulchre,

20:12. And she saw two angels in white, sitting, one at the head, and
one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had been laid.

20:13. They say to her: Woman, why weepest thou? She saith to them:
Because they have taken away my Lord: and I know not where they have
laid him.

20:14. When she had thus said, she turned herself back and saw Jesus
standing: and she knew not that it was Jesus.

20:15. Jesus saith to her: Woman, why weepest thou? Whom seekest thou?
She, thinking that it was the gardener, saith to him: Sir, if thou hast
taken him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him: and I will take him
away.

20:16. Jesus saith to her: Mary. She turning, saith to him: Rabboni
(which is to say, Master).

20:17. Jesus saith to her: Do not touch me: for I am not yet ascended to
my Father. But go to my brethren and say to them: I ascend to my Father
and to your Father, to my God and to your God.

20:18. Mary Magdalen cometh and telleth the disciples: I have seen the
Lord; and these things he said to me.

20:19. Now when it was late the same day, the first of the week, and the
doors were shut, where the disciples were gathered together, for fear of
the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst and said to them: Peace be
to you.

The doors were shut... The same power which could bring Christ's whole
body, entire in all its dimensions, through the doors, can without the
least question make the same body really present in the sacrament;
though both the one and the other be above our comprehension.

20:20. And when he had said this, he shewed them his hands and his side.
The disciples therefore were glad, when they saw the Lord.

20:21. He said therefore to them again: Peace be to you. As the Father
hath sent me, I also send you.

20:22. When he had said this, he breathed on them; and he said to them:
Receive ye the Holy Ghost.

20:23. Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them: and whose
sins you shall retain, they are retained.

Whose sins, etc... See here the commission, stamped by the broad seal of
heaven, by virtue of which the pastors of Christ's church absolve
repenting sinners upon their confession.

20:24. Now Thomas, one of the twelve, who is called Didymus, was not
with them when Jesus came.

20:25. The other disciples therefore said to him: We have seen the Lord.
But he said to them: Except I shall see in his hands the print of the
nails and put my finger into the place of the nails and put my hand into
his side, I will not believe.

20:26. And after eight days, again his disciples were within, and Thomas
with them. Jesus cometh, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst
and said: Peace be to you.

20:27. Then he said to Thomas: Put in thy finger hither and see my
hands. And bring hither the hand and put it into my side.  And be not
faithless, but believing.

20:28. Thomas answered and said to him: My Lord and my God.

20:29. Jesus saith to him: Because thou hast seen me, Thomas, thou hast
believed: blessed are they that have not seen and have believed.

20:30. Many other signs also did Jesus in the sight of his disciples,
which are not written in this book.

20:31. But these are written, that you may believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God: and that believing, you may have life in his
name.

John Chapter 21

Christ manifests himself to his disciples by the sea side and gives
Peter the charge of his sheep.

21:1. After this, Jesus shewed himself to the disciples at the sea of
Tiberias. And he shewed himself after this manner.

21:2. There were together: Simon Peter and Thomas, who is called
Didymus, and Nathanael, who was of Cana of Galilee, and the sons of
Zebedee and two others of his disciples.

21:3. Simon Peter saith to them: I go a fishing. They say to him: We
also come with thee. And they went forth and entered into the ship: and
that night they caught nothing.

21:4. But when the morning was come, Jesus stood on the shore: yet the
disciples knew not that it was Jesus.

21:5. Jesus therefore said to them: Children, have you any meat?  They
answered him: No.

21:6. He saith to them: Cast the net on the right side of the ship; and
you shall find. They cast therefore: and now they were not able to draw
it, for the multitude of fishes.

21:7. That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved said to Peter: It is the
Lord. Simon Peter, when he heard that it was the Lord, girt his coat
about him (for he was naked) and cast himself into the sea.

21:8. But the other disciples came in the ship (for they were not far
from the land, but as it were two hundred cubits) dragging the net with
fishes.

21:9. As soon then as they came to land they saw hot coals lying, and a
fish laid thereon, and bread.

21:10. Jesus saith to them: Bring hither of the fishes which you have
now caught.

21:11. Simon Peter went up and drew the net to land, full of great
fishes, one hundred and fifty-three. And although there were so many,
the net was not broken.

21:12. Jesus saith to them: Come and dine. And none of them who were at
meat, durst ask him: Who art thou? Knowing that it was the Lord.

21:13. And Jesus cometh and taketh bread and giveth them: and fish in
like manner.

21:14. This is now the third time that Jesus was manifested to his
disciples, after he was risen from the dead.

21:15. When therefore they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter: Simon,
son of John, lovest thou me more than these? He saith to him: Yea, Lord,
thou knowest that I love thee. He saith to him: Feed my lambs.

21:16. He saith to him again: Simon, son of John, lovest thou me?  He
saith to him: yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. He saith to him:
Feed my lambs.

21:17. He said to him the third time: Simon, son of John, lovest thou
me? Peter was grieved because he had said to him the third time: Lovest
thou me? And he said to him: Lord, thou knowest all things: thou knowest
that I love thee. He said to him: Feed my sheep.

Feed my sheep... Our Lord had promised the spiritual supremacy to St.
Peter; St. Matt. 16. 19; and here he fulfils that promise, by charging
him with the superintendency of all his sheep, without exception; and
consequently of his whole flock, that is, of his own church.

21:18. Amen, amen, I say to thee, When thou wast younger, thou didst
gird thyself and didst walk where thou wouldst. But when thou shalt be
old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee and
lead thee whither thou wouldst not.

21:19. And this he said, signifying by what death he should glorify God.
And when he had said this, he saith to him: Follow me.

21:20. Peter turning about, saw that disciple whom Jesus loved
following, who also leaned on his breast at supper and said: Lord, who
is he that shall betray thee?

21:21. Him therefore when Peter had seen, he saith to Jesus: Lord, and
what shall this man do?

21:22. Jesus saith to him: So I will have him to remain till I come,
what is it to thee? Follow thou me.

21:23. This saying therefore went abroad among the brethren, that that
disciple should not die. And Jesus did not say to him: He should not
die; but: So I will have him to remain till I come, what is it to thee?

21:24. This is that disciple who giveth testimony of these things and
hath written these things: and we know that his testimony is true.

21:25. But there are also many other things which Jesus did which, if
they were written every one, the world itself. I think, would not be
able to contain the books that should be written.


